Oh, children, since I have completed this book to you, which is the last of medical science, its completion will be fulfilled in it, and through its expositions, and its declarations, it is clear to me that I should complete it to you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, known as surgery.
For the operation by hand is fallen into disuse in our region and in our time, to the point where its science has greatly diminished, and its traces have vanished; nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which they altered most of it and deviated into error and falsity, until its meanings are closed off and its strength and art is weakened.
And it seems to me that I should revive it with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as they are by addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"And for this, Ipocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in action it is something small, and mostly in the art of the hand.
"But we have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book; for those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will fall into error, which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen too often, because some are trained in this science and yet they ignore it without knowledge or experimentation.
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and in doing so he also cut some arteries in her neck, causing a great deal of blood to flow until the woman died in his hands.
"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large. When he attempted to remove it, he also took out a piece of the bladder with it, which caused the man to die on the third day.
"And I was immediately called to remove it, and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then you unbind him according to his desires, and then you rebind him, and then you leave him dry for several days and order that we unbind the bandage; and this is how it goes until the space and the foot are suppurated, and it leads to destruction.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus he found tranquility and so alleviated his pains.
But still, the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another physician who lanced an infected abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the malignancy of it was magnified with the lord of him.
The cause of which is that the cancerous growth is full of black bile, so it is not beneficial for it to be removed completely with iron, but rather it should be treated locally on the affected limb.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two paths: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work with which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and under God's protection, and may your patients have success and steadfastness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to attain salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to cure. Remove your weapons from whatever causes you fear, so that trust in your faith and in your name does not elude you; for it is more befitting your glory, and both now and hereafter, it will be attributed to your sanctity.
France has already discussed with some of its physicians: "Do not practice harmful medicine, lest you be called bad doctors.
And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first is the first part. The first chapter deals with the head, particularly the shapes of instruments and the iron used in cauteries, as well as what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter concerns incisions and perforations, as well as cupping glasses, bloodletting, the extraction of arrows or similar objects, all arranged and ordered according to the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and the treatment of sprains and similar conditions; an ordered chapter about the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
I must tell you about the qualities of the tools for that cautery and their defects, and in which situation it is forbidden to perform cautery.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery tool and its defects is a long and elaborate discourse, subtle in knowledge, and secretly hidden; and many wise men have already spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me only a little of their speeches is sufficient, fearing prolixity.
And so I say that you may perform cautery in every situation universally, whether it involves material or not, except for two situations, which are situations involving cold without material.
In the cold and dry situation with material I will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial in that case, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that a cold and dry disease with water, which is hot and wet, be healed.
And say that the opposite of what was said before is true, because the cautery is used to help in all dry and cold diseases that appear in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I say by the words of that one, that I have experienced this many times myself.
However, it is not necessary for someone who has already been trained and practiced in the chapter of cautery by recent practice, and who knows the diversity of human nature and the dispositions of diseases within them, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration.
But in other conditions, there is no need to fear, especially in cold and moist diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not disagreeing about the help of cautery in those cases.
And know, my sons, that concerning the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its effectiveness, it has been said about cautery with medicine that it is better, because fire is simple and its action only affects the member on which it is used, not harming the neighboring member except for a slight injury.
Based on the provided example, I'll attempt to translate this sentence into English:
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate this medieval medical text into English. Here it is line by line:
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to make cautery and consider the best time to be in spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times because the harm caused by accidental circumstances is diminished by the benefit obtained from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or serious and persistent diseases which do not tolerate delay due to fear of worse outcomes, which is greater than a slight harm caused by the timing.
And do not let this concern you, my sons, for only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, as it is understood that the ailment which is healed by cautery does not recur at all times, and they consider this consequence.
And the reason is not as they think, because cautery is used only in cases where medicine fails to change the complexion and dry out the humors that cause pain.
However, cautery exceeds medicine in its quickness of action and the power of its operation, as well as the skill of its practitioner.
And it is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared in their body from an excess of fluids and what they have acquired in their diet and similar causes. However, if the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few superfluities and humors, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return to them. But this is usually only done for minor ailments.
Here's the translation for your sentence:
Based on the given text, here's my attempt at translating and interpreting the new sentence: And now from here, I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my own understanding, but according to the common belief and foolish practices of many doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the properties and high quality of gold's substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not become stiff, which is not entirely true, because I have proven and found that this happens in some bodies but not others. Cauterizing with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire and gold, it is not clearly stated to you, because it depends on the amount of gold you want according to the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat. And if you place a fire over it, the gold melts from the heat, and some sheets fall into the fire for the craftsman to catch due to his occupation with it.
And because of this, when performing cautery with iron, you should do so more lightly and precisely to ensure proper execution.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery in several chapters and ordered those from the head to the feet, so that the seeker may find what they want from it.
"The first chapter.
"This cauterization treats the cold and dampness which are the two causes of these accidents, being a cause of sores and many flows, called rheum, from the head to the parts of the ears and the cheeks, and much sleepiness, and toothache and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sores, apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
"The way to perform this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to take a purgative medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual habits.
"And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then have that person sit between your hands on a low bench and place their feet on the ground.
"And then place the tip of your palm near the bridge of the nose, between their eyebrows. "However, once your finger has reached the midpoint, mark that spot with an inkwell, and then ignite the cautery olive, which is of this form:
And then place that over the indicated area with a sheet in such a way that it descends, and with which the left hand is tightly squeezed little by little, and you turn that.
And then lightly lift your hand and look at the place, and if you see some part of the bone exposed, as much as a grain of barley, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand with that iron, or another similar one, until what I have told you is seen from the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it in that place and let it sit for three days.
And then place on the wound a cloth soaked in water and leave it there until the crust of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the area with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And they say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm heals, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held until a piece of the shape of the bone is charred.
"And then it should be scraped off whatever is adjacent to the bone, and then it should be cauterized.
"And others say that with the cautery one should reach the bone's interior, pressing hard until it pierces the bone, and this is the method of small incision. "And it is believed that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
"And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
"But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, only on some people out of fear; and if you ask me, it is better to be alive with health than not, because the head is opened due to the discontinuity of it, just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a weak nature.
"And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and from it one exits healthy and with this work done.
Chapter two.
On cauterizing the head.
When there is chronic and prolonged pain throughout the head of the patient, and they have used cupping glasses, leeches, capillary purges, plasters, baths, cataplasms, poultices, and similar treatments, especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery that does not benefit them at all from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not weak and finds great cold, then that one should be cauterized again with another cautery below that one. And then burn that part on the horn of his head with a pointed cautery until the skin breaks. Incise the skin and expose the bone to the extent we have calculated, and cauterize that area with a pointed cautery at the back of the head in the place called 'vas', which is where bloodletting cups are placed. And be careful with this, and do not expose the bone, because the patient experiences great pain from this that is different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I say that this cautery should be done in its place, because the cautery used for burning the horns of the head and the occiput should be finer than the one used for burning the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Chapter three.
On the cautery for newly onset migraine.
When there is sudden pain in the head or when the pain spreads to the eye, it should be treated with purifying medications and the other treatments that I have mentioned for diseases; if this does not help, then cautery on the head can be done in two ways: either by burning with a sharp instrument or with a heated iron.
"However, cauterization with medicine is such that you should take a piece of wool and clean it thoroughly, then bind the ends of it on both sides. "Then cut the painful area in the temple with a sharp lance until it reaches the bone, ensuring it is well concealed.
"Then strengthen it with a bandage to reduce the swelling, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and apply wool, and let the wound be for two or three days, then place on it a cloth soaked in warm water until the area is soft.
"Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
"And if you wish, do this with some of the medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
"But cauterization with iron should be done in this manner: heat the iron for cautery, and this is its form:
"and it is called a 'nail head,' because its tip is shaped like a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
"Then place it on the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the archer's arm is not burnt — and rotate the iron slowly.
And if the amount of him that is tied by the end of the rope equals half of him, raise your hand to prevent the artery from being tied, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then immediately drench a cloth in salt water and place it on the wound, leaving it for three days; and then place a clean cloth with a border, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this eminence, which is quite old.
Chapter four.
On Cauterization of Old Eminences
When you treat eminences with the water cure we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective, sometimes due to the disease that is not enough for him with what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire, then you should heat up the scalpel until it becomes white hot. This indicates the location of the pain with a line the length of which is half the width of the finger; whether that or not. Place your hand on it once and press firmly until you incise the artery and reach the bone.
Sure, here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And if it concerns the care and caution regarding blood flow from an artery that is about to burst, because in its bursting there is danger, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; leave the operation to someone more knowledgeable at first.
And I will recall the treatment of accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its section of this book.
And if the remedy of this disease is not sufficient with this cautery and the patient's body is tolerant, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and care for the wound until it heals.
And if you want, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with two needles, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter 5
On the Cauterization of Earaches
When an earache occurs due to cold and is not cured by laxative treatments or other remedies mentioned in the division, then apply the cautery, specifically one called "puncture." Its form is as follows:
And then pierce near the inflamed area, and lead around all of the auricle like a wheel turning, or around each specific point if the pain is in that particular area. And then approach with the cautery along the ridge of the auricle, little by little more until you have found the spot with your finger.
And if the cautery of these points is done all over the auricle, and if it is like that, then cure the areas until they are healed.
Chapter VI
On the Cauterization of Turtle Dove
The turtledove that is cured by cauterization is only from the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization for the species that comes from dryness or from a spasm of the nerves.
When you cure this species of turtle dove with herbs, purgatives and gargles, and your cure does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one on the ridge of the auricle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is such that you should cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the upper edge of the earlobe, placing it slightly above the tip of the ear, and in the temple place another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then hold your hand with the cautery until the majority of the size of a hazelnut is burnt.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is similar to that of the knife, whose form is presented here. However, it must be more delicate than the knife, as shown here; and it is necessary that the blade of the cautery have a little less superfluous thickness.
And then care for the place with water that was previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on both corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape. The method of the cautery is done as previously described.
It has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more severe now; therefore, it should be treated with cold water.
Chapter VIII
Of the cautery for oblivion done by flame.
It is advisable that in the beginning, large jars and pills of wormwood be given to the patient for purging.
Then shave the head of the patient completely and place on his temples the plaster of cedar, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And do this several times, for that is the manner of cautery. And do so according to the order of physicians, as I have already said.
And thus, if he is cured well by this; but if not, then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head into the lower part of the neck. And place the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery with cold water.
But if you see an increase and the patient is tolerant, then make a cautery in the middle of the head; and if there is greater increase, then cauterize on both temples. xspace
"Now care for that opening so that it heals; and let the pointed cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
"About the cauterization of hemorrhoids and the softening of the whole body.
"Cut the hair on the patient's head with scissors and water as mentioned before; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head, and with a pointed cautery over all the corners of the head, and with a pointed cautery over the back part of them, and with three points over the vertebrae of the neck.
"And if it is necessary due to the illness of softening the body from too much heat and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four points over the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with a point within until it is reddened by the skin, and raise your hand. "And now care for that opening so that it heals, and this should be an olive-shaped point.
Chapter X.
"About the cauterization of epilepsy.
"An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, then administer fortifying and nourishing liquids that cleanse the body for several days with an improvement in food.
Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previously mentioned method, and with another cautery on their occiput, and over each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and enduring, then cauterize them with the aforementioned cauteries, having first made the body numb and softened it over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped as previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI
On the Cauterization of Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick smoke, then cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned, after making the body numb.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that turns into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to drink that cleanses their brain according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
Here's my best attempt at translating the given text into English:
And let the patient be seated in a chair, and held securely from all sides.
Then place an ointment; and it is more fitting to use one made from sheep fat. And warm that over a moderate fire so that it can provide gentle warmth when applied to the patient. Then place it on the middle of the patient's head in a circular shape, and let him be covered so that he is warmed.
Do this with the patient once a week for as long as necessary according to his other treatment; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to his size, unless you have a cautery prepared in this way: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then place that bandage soaked in fat or in linseed oil.
Chapter .12
On the cauterization of water running from the eye.
When you have recognized the onset of water in the eye by the signs I mentioned earlier, begin and give the patient something to drink that will dry out his head, and protect him from all moistures.
And make him soak in a bath of vinegar for some days.
And command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of watering of the eyes in both eyes, or with one burn if it is the beginning of water in one eye.
Cauterize with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the neck; and let the cauteries be in that place on the level of the temples.
And beware of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flow from him, stop it with some medicine that you have available.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and their obliteration, and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck under two bones with two well-prepared cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On Cauterizing Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are persistent and through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious place on the head outside, and it is verified that this is superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck under both temples, and with two cauteries in the neck under both bones. E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.
This line means "Chapter XIV.
About the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
When you treat that (patient) with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the sick person garlic to drink for three nights; and next shave their head, and cauterize them with a midwife's cautery or an olive-oil cautery. And next, cauterize that (patient) with a carnation cautery and two cauteries on the eyebrows below the hair by a little.
And beware of the archery so as not to burn that (area).
And this is the shape of the carnation cautery:
Chapter XV
About the cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you (wish to) cauterize that (patient), do so on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but according to the quantity by which the third section of the eyelid is burnt.
Chapter XVI.
When the hair on the eyelid turns into three parts and closes the eye, use the cautery on the eyelid.
When the hairs on the eye turn inwards and close the eye, cauterization is done in two ways: either by burning or with a caustic medicine.
If you are cauterizing with fire, tell the patient beforehand to pull out their eyelashes like those who pluck them, until they have grown back and been trimmed; and if it is necessary for their birth, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that they are not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
Therefore, when they have grown back and been trimmed, place the patient's head on your lap, and then apply over the eyelids of his eyes a sign in the shape of a maple leaf, with the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or a paste of ptilium over the eye.
And then heat the pointed cautery which is of this form.
And then cauterize on the figure which you have designated, little by little, in several places, until the surface of the coden is burned as if it were a myrtle leaf, clearly visible.
The sign of the healthiness of this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And so raise your hand and leave it for three days, then place a compress with a border on it until the crust is removed. And then care for that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for some reason to their original state and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery on that same way as you did initially.
But if the hairs are on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and is healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
But the cauterizing medicine should burn this; you command the patient to pull out the hairs until they are elongated and healed. And then a piece of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf should be made.
Sure, let's break down the sentence into parts and translate it line by line:
And place the cloth on the medicine, and press it slightly without moving until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is in them as if from fire.
And so when he perceives that he has found the sting, then remove the medicine and apply it again with the cloth; and when the sting ceases, then reapply the medicine and wash the area with water; and at this point consider if you see the eyelid lifted as if it is washed with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it was not previously applied, without moving until your operation is completed and the wound is contracted.
And then place a bandage on the wound until the thread of the suture is removed, and then care for it with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to guard with vigilant care that no remnant of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after several days the eyelid becomes softened and some hairs grow in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the spot where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at first, and then cover it until it is healed.
"And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
"And know that men's heels are diverse according to size and smallness, and thus your treatment is made accordingly.
"And the path of correctness will not be hidden from one who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
"On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
"When you treat a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have someone hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with the patient's head.
"Then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or birdlime over their eye.
"And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
"which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or the quill of a vulture, with one end used to make the cautery.
"And if you wish, it may penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, it could be like this.
However, that which is hollow is better for the work at hand.
Then press on the opening if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the corruption from it.
Then place over it the cautery which should be well lit, and hold with that hand a little above the cautery of the mouth towards the nostril, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and destroy it.
And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more, if necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place a bandage on that spot and surround it with drying ointment until it heals.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
There is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier said: take at the place of the fistula and open it up, and then insert into that opening a thin needle whose shape matches its own; and pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold with your hand a needle with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the brain of that patient; and you should place on the head of the patient a cloth dipped in egg white or water, for lead attracts the place of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the water that we have mentioned for cautery and care, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a potion through the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterizing the Split of the Feet.
Often these splits occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those splits with the water that we mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then burn it with a small cautery knife according to this form as follows:
And let its cavity be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then carefully place this (knife) into those splits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the splits.
And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
On Cauterizing a Fistula in the Mouth.
When an abscess forms in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and pus runs out, forming a fistula. And if you treat this and the treatment is not effective, then you must burn with a cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula. And place the burning iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its bottom. And at the end of it, do so once or twice; and then treat this with the water we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And therefore if the wound is cut open and healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones as specified in its chapter.
Chapter 20
On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of veins.
When veins are softened by moisture and teeth are aching, and if medicines are applied to them but do not work, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown below, so that you place the small tube over the tooth and insert the heated cautery into it swiftly, holding the patient's mouth slightly open so that he may feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then raise your hand, and then repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the aching tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21
"On the cauterization of tooth pain.
"When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a blister or worm in it, and you cannot cure it with medicine, then cauterize the area according to two methods: either cauterize with cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
"To cauterize with horn, you take cow's horn and burn it in the bottom of an iron pan. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, then dip it into the burnt horn, and place it on the painful tooth immediately until it is numb.
"And then repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
"And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn, and place it on the painful tooth, and then place a heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
"However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the needle of iron or steel, and it should be in the middle of it some thickness so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
And then heat the cautery in the shape that is to come, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is heated; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient, through the impression of that cautery, fills his mouth with good broth and holds it for an hour, and then rinses his mouth; and this is how to prepare the cautery.
And cauterize with whatever extreme method you wish, according to your ability.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII
On the Cauterization of Prolapse
When prolapse is caused by phlegm and cold humors, and they are not compliant with digestion through medicines, and you desire the digestion of those [humors] somewhat, then heat the cautery in the shape as follows: having two openings so that smoke can escape from the cautery through one opening, and place the heated cautery on the prolapse once or twice more if necessary, until it reaches the base of the prolapse.
And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the prolapse. And leave it for three days, and then place a compress soaked in broth on it until what the fire has burned off is reduced.
And then care for him with ointments, bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Hoarseness and Constriction of the Throat
When moisture comes to the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness and congestion, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines, and then you should cauterize him on the root of the throat in the depressed area.
And take care not to go too deep with the cautery into the throat nor burn too much of its cord.
And then cauterize him with another cautery on the joint of the neck at his last vertebra. And let the cautery for him be prepared in the same manner as mentioned before.
And then care for him with the water mentioned earlier until he is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On Cauterization for Illnesses of the Lung and Cough
When cough and lung illness are due to cold moisture and the patient has no fever or phlegm and the illness is chronic, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas called lion's eye and ox's eye; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and let the cauteries be prepared according to the form mentioned before.
And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called "punctum," whose shape precedes in the treatment of earache pain.
And place points within these [areas]; and then treat it with the remedy that has been prescribed until it is healed.
And let the cauteries have three branches because the cauterization is done with it: in one go you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV
On Cauterization of the Tympanum, which is the head of the auditory canal.
When the head of the auditory canal is dislocated due to moist and lubricating humors and does not stay in place during its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal, and then by a slight movement it can be relocated as it should be, as we have found. Therefore, first of all, reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their back or side; then raise the handle which is in the concave part of the tympanum with your left hand's fingers, if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
And then heat the cautery which has two tips, and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tendon until it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of cauterization will be that of four tips.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and there are eight cauteries.
And then apply powdered salt to the cautery, and then make the patient lie down quietly, and let the limb not be moved for any time until it is soothed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper part and is done late, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed or sharp-pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach
When there is cold and excessive moisture in the stomach, to the point where it is expelled from its place and many raumas are multiplied within him, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without success, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, extend his hands and feet, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery below the foot to the depth of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries on both sides of the cautery, until you achieve a triangular figure; and make sure that those which are not properly adjusted will cause blistering.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this shape:
And let the stomach be punctured at that which is feared from this cautery: and it is that you know on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with trial, and then cauterize that with cautery in the points; and then heal that with the preceding healing until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cautery of the cold foot.
When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence until its normal state is restored by superfluous evacuation, and if the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned without contraindications, then it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back, and know with trial three cauteries according to this shape and this quantity placed on the foot below the hypochondria, which is the position of a man lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press with the cauteries much.
And if the amount of water that has been held is the majority of the volume of the bladder and it is not more adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having extended their thighs, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed blade, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to press too much during the cauterization, and let the space of all the bladder be held so that the whole body is held and it enters into the intestines, because the bladder here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .28.
Of the piercing of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
When a swelling or abscess appears in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the lining of the liver, with pain that is very sharp and often exhausting for doctors to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their back; and then locate the area of the abscess with a probe; and then heat the cautery that resembles a rag, whose shape is depicted on the previous page. And cauterize with that and cautery until the entire swelling is burned, until it reaches the pus, until there is a discharge.
Then treat it in the same way as for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery except for those which are prolonged in the art of medicine and with which most patients have experience; but this has been tried a few times for this operation, yet nevertheless leave that one to us, and it is better.
Chapter .29
On the Cauterization of Plasters.
The ancients said that cautery for the treatment of plasters should be made in this manner: and it is that you take from the dried roots of Aristolochia a long, dry root which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
And then submerge that (area) in oil and light it on fire; then cauterize with a cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, slightly declining towards the area beneath the chin, and with two cauteries on the area declining between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly declining towards the back areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back areas; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary to cover your hand with the cautery, but it should be in plain view at the tip of the cord.
And some ancient authorities say that there are certain men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and insert it into the location between the ribs until they reach the abscess and expel the pus, as we have said in the case of the foot abscess.
But in this procedure with a cautery there is danger, for one may die immediately if it occurs in the location of an ulcer that has not healed.
It seems like you're asking for help translating a sentence from an old text. However, you haven't provided the actual sentence that needs translation. Could you please provide the full sentence or paragraph that you need help with?
"On the cauterization of the spleen.
"When you treat the illness of the spleen with water as we have described in the treatment section and your treatment does not work, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen following the figure of the cauteries on the foot, the figure of which has been provided.
"And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and let the manner of the cauterization be the same as we have said for the cauteries on the foot.
"And do not press with your hand on the cauteries; and let the patient be lying on their back.
"And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you heat the cauteries with two outpourings, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the rib that is in the place of the spleen so that the lying patient can receive it.
"And let your lifting with which you lift the rib be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
And then extract the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
If you see, cauterize with a cautery having three times.
Then take care of the cautery since it has been discarded for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter .31
On the Cauterization of Dropsy.
A cautery does not catch in dropsy except specifically in the bladder.
When you treat a dropsical patient with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for him to be cauterized with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the ribs, and another cautery on the spleen, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the membrane.
Then leave the cautery open, so that it may remain for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of treatment immediately after the cautery with water that is appropriate, for it should be added to him two intentions, and he will be healed quickly with healing aids.
The sentence means: "The shape of the cautery used for burning the abdomen should be pointed as described above, and the one used for burning the back should be olive-shaped as described earlier.
It appears that you provided the chapter or section number "Capitol .xxxii." rather than an actual sentence to translate. If there's a specific passage from the medieval medical treatise you would like me to translate, please provide it, and I'll do my best to assist you.
### Translation:
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the soles of the feet in the space between the auricular (little toe) and the anular (ring finger), lifting your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand again, but do not completely withdraw it, because the dropsy will subside.
The cautery should be done in this manner: Then apply two cauteries to both sides, and in each side make a cautery with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery. And let the cautery be as long as the side: one under the armpit and the other in the middle of the side; and on each side, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without dressing for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.  (This is likely indicating the beginning of a new chapter or section in the text.)
On Cautery of the Abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity to the point of weakening the virtues, which are the digestive and retentive virtues found in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with methods of cure and diet. Sometimes patients suffer from a cautery of virtue emerging, then cauterize that part with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has been mentioned previously in the cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; and with a cautery on the bladder with a great amount, or with two cauteries.  (Note: The text uses some archaic terminology that may not have direct modern equivalents, such as "vertut" for vital power or faculty, and "alcatin" which seems to refer to the urinary bladder.)
Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
It seems like you're starting a new section or chapter, as indicated by "Capitol" which is likely a typo for "Chapter" in Latin ("Capitulum"). The ".xxxiv." suggests this is Chapter 34. So the translation would be:
"On the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
"When there is in nature behind old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are treated with the water we mentioned in the division and the cure does not take effect, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus below the small of the back, making them triangular and small, and with a cautery above the navel passing through two fingers.
"And if you suspect that his stomach is chilled and his food is not well-cooked, and his face appears pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the ankle, and with another cautery on his spleen with a pointed cautery. Leave the cautery open for some time, and then heal him within so that he is cured.
Chapter 35
"On Cauterization Near the Absence of Atrophy
"When you cut away atrophy, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. "Then insert that heated [cautery] into the cut atrophy and continue with your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And perform this one or two times, because if they are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with something suitable from the ointments until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some part of the body, it will be more beneficial for healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
On the Cautery of Fistulas that are formed naturally in their parts.
When nature does not obey the work we have recounted in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has an old fistula naturally, and it is full of corrupt humors and putrid moisture, what is most fitting to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray (of sunlight). And then place that heated cautery into this fistula, according to the depth at which you inserted the probe.
And repeat with the cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, depending on your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves or the veins; or if there is a fistula in the bladder or the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it will not penetrate.
And then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains that way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the bone of it is corrupt, or this happens for one of those reasons which will be remembered in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the Cautery of Hemorrhoids
When there is pain in the hemorrhoids due to cold or excessive ventosity, and because of this the patient's blood is thinned, then it is necessary to cauterize that above the hemorrhoids with a cautery on each hemorrhoid, using a needle from which you will take the memory.
And strongly cauterize with the second one a little below, so that three lines of cautery will be made, and thus they will be more durable in healing.
Based on the context of medieval medical treatises and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the text line by line. Here's the translation for "Capitol .xxxviii.":
"On the Cautery of the Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, to the point that the patient cannot hold urine, then cauterize them in the part below the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with a pointed instrument on the right side, and with another on the left side of the patient.
And let the length of each pointed instrument be according to the amount of cold in the patient's body; and cauterize them with a pointed instrument in the lower back area, or with two instruments if necessary.
And let the pointed instrument be sharpened according to the nature of the process.
Chapter .xxxix.
"On the Cautery of the Uterus.
When cold and moisture occur in the uterus, preventing conception, corrupting menstrual flow, delaying their onset, and causing pain during menses, then the area should be cauterized with three pointed instruments around the navel, as we have said in the case of bladder cautery; and with a pointed instrument below the lower back, or two if necessary. And let the points be sharpened.
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in any language that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be a nonsensical string of words and symbols. If you have a different text you would like me to try translating, please provide it.
"On the Cauterization for Ankle Dislocation.
"When moistness is infused into the ankle area and it causes displacement from its place, the sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when they are compared. "And the location of the dislocation is found where there is swelling.
"Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a round-shaped cautery, for you will have sensed it in the circle around the area as it turns, and thus the area will fall exactly in the middle of the circle.
"And let the cautery be of a similar form to that used for stomach cauterization.
"And if this type of cautery is not available to you, then use three small olive-shaped cauteries.
"And the cautery should be made according to the size of the entire cord; and then care for it so that it may heal.
"Chapter XLI
"On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the groin area and is caused by coldness and moisture, the patient should be treated with the water we have mentioned, not with oil. If this treatment is old, then you must rid the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; then cauterize that area.
The method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines or cauterize with fire.
According to two known methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area on the patient's groin with three triangular cauteries, as shown in this form; and make good depth with them. And let the space between each cautery be the width of a fingertip, whether the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the groin, at the top of the thigh, because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, you can cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of hip dislocation, which is a continuous circle and burns the tip of the entire groin.
And this is the method of cauterization for hip pain when it is localized to the groin and has not spread into the thigh.
Here's the translation of the sentence:
And if you are using a cautery knife, ensure that the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the patient's tendon.
And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to another part of the body near the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery through three points or four, or more if necessary.
And if the patient indicates that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that area with a cautery knife.
And be careful in all cauterization that you do not damage the nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, as this could cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen one and another of these cases where they cauterized the ankle and ended up in the cauterization by causing swelling in the leg until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and completely rotten. And this causes a very strong bellyache, and can lead to death.
And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise say about cauterization of water, which is done in this manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of a fingertip or less.
And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a finger; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those cuts should be one or two fingers wide, and make on those edges an iron hoop decently prepared in the circles; and this is its form.
Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and begins to spark, and then it should be placed on the open wound, with the patient lying on their side. And so cauterize that part with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave that for three days; then bandage that with gauze and leave the wound open for several days; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Abu Qasim (Abulcasis) says: O children, of this type of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its effects, and because few are those who know how to manage it.
But from these cauteries, those who have suffered them and find with them their place (in the body).
But cauterize with medicinal adhesives, making two circles that have a perforated armlet in which they place the iron hoop; let the length of the wall be one or two fingers wide, and those (circles) should be high as needed.
And if the spaces which are between each finger's thickness are opened from below and above, and if they contain themselves within them according to this form:
And immediately place the patient on their side with the ankle part raised, and press your hand on the ankle part; then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and make sure that its heat is gradually increased, and keep this for about one hour, until the patient endures the biting and burning sensation — because this remedy is like a fire — until the biting sensation subsides.
Then immediately lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the entire ankle with cool water.
Then let it rest for three days and place a bandage on it until the blackness of the burn is removed. Let it rest like this for some more days, and the pain will subside; this is beneficial in the end.
Then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue of him that contains water in the same way as it is done with the ankle.
And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take equal parts of alkali and soda, mix them together and place them in a new vessel, leaving an opening for the air to escape according to the amount that enters into it.
Then place another inverted vessel under the first one, and pour over it two spoonfuls of living water onto the alkali and soda. After compressing them well with your hand, let the acrid water flow into the lower inverted vessel.
Then collect all that water and pour it over more living water and renewed alkali, because at that time it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, for it has a burning effect.
And some of the medicines with which it is cauterized are, for example, tea tree and honey, as well as soda.  And they must be mixed together.
And a certain man of the ancients recounted an operation and cure with which water pain and sciatica are cured, and he said that it was very effective, and that no other cure is necessary, because it is healed once and for all as he recounts. For he makes him enter a bath and immediately he comes out of it healthy.  (Note: The text appears to describe hydrotherapy or some form of water-based treatment for pain relief.)
And it is that a certain plant called vert should be taken, and if vert cannot be found, then take a fresh fig; and everything should be crushed with a little bit of gray (salt) and placed on the spot where the pain is, either in the cavity or on the thigh, and let it rest.
And let it be left for a duration of three hours, or for however long the patient feels relief from the pain.
And then immediately place them in a bath and as soon as their body is warmed up, remove them from the water, because the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that it is not advisable to use cautery with these medicines except to promote the body's evacuation (of humors).
However, Hippocrates said that when the vein known as vena streptica is cauterized with a goat's hair, it will be of great benefit to the patient; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.  (Note: "fossil" here likely refers to the space between the fingers, not the mineral.)
And then take a dry goat's hair and singe it with fire until it is turned to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it is extended. And then you should continue doing this, and do not stop until the feeling of biting penetrates to the bone and relieves the pain.
And this manner of using the cautery is called "cautery with cupping.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as fall or injury, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and moist material.
Cauterization is only effective in this particular case which is caused by the infusion of cold material.
Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar ones that are made on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its width, since in each line you can make ten cauteries or more, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the fire.
And the cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, you can cauterize with three or four middle-sized nails, like this:
It appears that you provided only the chapter or section number without any actual text to translate. If you provide a full sentence from the medieval medical treatise, I'd be happy to attempt a translation for you!
This means "About Cautery at the Beginning of Jaundice.
Here's a line-by-line translation:
"And you will find in the last vertebra of the back and the buttocks of the patient that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
"And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery like this: "so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
"And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines. "And let the points be close together.
"And care for the area until it is healed with what we have said.
"But beware that a cautery should not be administered in an area affected by nerve spasm.
"Chapter XLIV
"On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
"When joint pains are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each member of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout specifically.
"And therefore when gout caused by cold is treated and the pain does not subside, then apply a cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that appropriate evacuation around the joint of the foot with small cauteries.
And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the teeth or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that (pain) on each tooth with three or four cauteries all around with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if the small cauteries that you need are not available, then cauterize with these and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only as much as needed to touch the surface of the skin.
And if the pain rises into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands, and it is called suagra, then prick in the circle of the fingertips like this: prick in these two lines.
And if there remains pain in the said places, then prick around the fingertips on each finger and at the tip of the hand.
And if the pains increase over several days in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize each of them throughout all parts of the aid.
And you do not expel the patient from good care and the reception of medicines, for if good care is taken and heat is expelled with this cautery, he will be cured, God helping.
Chapter 45
Of the Cauterization of Ruptures
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines protrude through the hernia, and this begins to happen, it is necessary for you to instruct the patient to stop eating on that day and use lenitive agents so that the opening of his belly does not increase.
And then follow the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is passed or the hernia or the intestines appear.
And then return to him with these words and signs, trying to reduce the hernia over the pubic bone, signaling the edge of which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery whose form is this:
"Until it is red and sparks are emitted. Here's a translation of the given text into English:
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And then press the cautery against that mark with your hand, keeping the cautery straight, and drive it in until you reach the bones of the phalanx into the middle of the duodenum; and repeat with that again if you did not achieve it in the first attempt to enter the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during your cautery, to avoid burning it, lest the patient suffer death or other serious illness.
And know that when you do not touch the bones with the cautery, your operation will be ineffective.
And it is necessary for the cautery of children to be delicate according to their age and size.
Then care for the cauterized area for three days with bandages until the scab from the fire is removed.
And then care for that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
And it is necessary to provide the patient's nutrition according to the duration of their treatment, which fills their stomach and prevents the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is time to lift after approximately forty days, administer a gentle ointment and keep it there for another forty days.
And let him refrain from work and from overindulgence in food and drink, as well as from loud voices, for when he follows this complete healing regimen, he will surely be healed.
And I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you wish to prevent them from recurring, cauterize the rupture with a rounded cautery according to its size, so that it is burned out just like the third part of it; and then treat it as we have said, and it will not reoccur.
And some say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this, because it is marked with a cross.
And a line is drawn that runs along the latitude of the back above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.  (or Chapter 46)
On the Cauterization of Hernia.
When pain occurs in certain members due to a fall or blow and this pain persists for a long time without improving with medicine, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery should be appropriate for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, as well as its virtue, openness, and the location of the pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on that spot; for it is customary for those pains to be transferred from one member to another nearby, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47
On the Cauterization of Leprosy
Some lepers are cured with a cautery to great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize that [type of leprosy], consider if the leprosy is common and of that kind which we have said in the division, and do not say this one or that one, and fear for the patient that the corruption may affect his entire body and all its parts. In such a case, you should cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, even to the forehead at the hairline; and both on two temples; and one behind, either on the nape or the crown of the head.
And finally, use the cautery with your hand to make a slight indentation on the bone, thereby relieving the pressure of the accumulated humors, allowing for the release of large vapors from the body; and cauterize over the spleen as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears clearly, then you should cauterize with those cauteries that we mentioned on the head; and cauterize at the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the two vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the ribs, and one on the ribs, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the wrists, and one on each wrist, and with two on the elbows, and two on the armpits, and two on the soles of the feet; and cauterize over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the knuckles of the fingers.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
And know that the more precisely you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery itself, as long as their body is already numbed.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small depending on the members and the joints, according to what has been prescribed by the types of tools.
And then treat the cautery with flour mixed with honey and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .48.
On the Cauterization of Stupor (or Coma).
When a certain member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether it is large or small.
And let your cautery enter a little into the spine.  (In this context, "spine" likely refers to the spinal cord rather than the vertebrae.) And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.
But do not assume this [procedure] unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit points of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
On Cauterization of Varicose Veins
When varicose veins are old and you do not administer any of the medicinal ointments to them, then cauterize it with a cautery for a little while, according to the size of the vein's cord until its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
Then care for it with a poultice of barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and rue leaves, and with the blood of a dove or pigeon, each being one part, and all mixed together. Then a cloth should be soaked in this mixture and placed on the area until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On Cauterization of Cancer
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it extends.
And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the lesion; but I have not seen this, because I fear it will cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen sometimes.
And it is more appropriate that the patient be cauterized around the affected area with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 1
Of the Cautery for the Weakened (or Infirm).
When someone is delayed in their healing process, whether due to the excess of the remedy used on them, or because of the patient's condition being old and weak, with little blood, or due to the time, and you wish to hasten the healing of this person; then cauterize around the affected area with multiple small cauteries; and thus leave it so that it may hasten in its healing.
However, if you wish to pierce the area with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is this: and place it in the middle of the affected area until it penetrates deeply.
And if you place the cautery in that lower part of the arm, so that the body of the arm is relieved; then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 2
Of the Cautery for Corrosive Ulcers (or Erosion).
A corrosive ulcer is a corruption that moves through the member, which eats away at it like fire consuming dry wood.
When you see that area being eroded due to the application of a hot cautery iron, then heat the cautery iron with very few and large nails, according to what is appropriate for that area being eroded.
Then cauterize the entire affected area until you have completely eliminated all the corrosion and left no trace of it.
Then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas linen cloth soaked in oil until all the scabs have fallen off and all the corruption has been eliminated.
Then treat it with a flesh-generating ointment.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing in the area where there was no corruption, then it is good; however, if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas where there is still corruption.
And erosion can be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because that works in place of a cautery. However, cauterization by fire is more effective against pus.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the appropriate section, so take that when you need to use it.
Chapter 53
"About the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
"Many times it is necessary to apply heat to the wound beneath the afflicted foot known as a sore or ulcer, which is large and deep; this wound affects the foot. Cauterization in these cases can be done in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
"However, cauterization by fire involves heating the cautery like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the entire wound from all sides, and should be of fine edges.
"Then place that heated instrument on the wound and turn your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wound until it reaches the depth of the wound. "And leave it there for three days until it begins to form a scab. "And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt on it, and leave the plaster on for one night, because that will heal it from its root.
"And then treat the area with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
"And if it does not heal, and often this occurs on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should apply cauterization with hot water to those areas. This involves taking a small tube made of bronze, iron, or vulture's beak and placing it on the wound; then pour a little hot water into the tube, hold your hand steady, and rotate the tube with pressure from your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the wound, so that the hot water reaches the core of the wound. Wait for the patient to feel the burn of the hot water for an hour, then remove it, as the wound with its roots will be healed.
And thus it is done with these, and then another enters who will come over all of them that are in the body.
And then cure those as soon as the causes of the nails have been eradicated with ointments that generate new skin.
Chapter .43.
On Cautery for Tremors.
When someone has a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to a fever of similar cause, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, with an olive-shaped cautery.
And their tremor will subside and the healing of the cold disease will hasten.
Chapter .55.
On Cautery for Sudden Accidents in the Body.
When there are sudden breakouts on the body, and they are pustules or splits made of thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning of their appearance, it is necessary that they be cauterized all over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle handle, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long, thin razors; or with lens-shaped cauteries. ️
Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
"However, it is necessary that this be done after an evacuation with phlebotomy.
In the case of pain in the joints caused by cold humors, which infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. However, it is necessary that this be done after an evacuation with phlebotomy.
"On the cauterization of blood flow caused by an arrow wound.
"When a wound from an arrow is seen to be bleeding due to the cut of the wound itself, or because of the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and it appears similar, and it is difficult for that to remain.
"Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should immediately press with your hand on the opening of the arrow wound, and place your finger firmly over it until the bleeding stops, without allowing any blood to escape.
"And then place the olivewood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire, in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are red hot.
And immediately take one of the small or large needles according to the location and wound where the artery has been cut, quickly apply pressure to that vein after you have removed the tourniquet, and continue cauterizing until the blood flow is stopped and restricted.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the tourniquet and pull out the cautery, then immediately take another hot cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction if it has not yet been extracted, because when it is extracted the limbs are better burned and the blood flow is stopped; or it may be tied with thread or a ligature with strong tension, or medicines that have the property of stopping blood flow may be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with proper pressure.
"But he who administers restriction should do so with discretion and with constraint using cloth or by position due to causes of burning and similar symptoms, do not perform this [procedure] until late.
"But if this needs to be done for someone and neither the physician nor any medicine is present, then apply the aforementioned dressing over the openings of that vein as we have said, understanding that great pressure must be applied to stop the blood from the main source of the wound, and do not remove the dressing; and over the dressing, pour very cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and beware that one may need a cautery or necessary medicine.
"Of incisions, perforations, and bloodletting, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds, and their similar conditions.
"We have already said in the first chapter about every ailment in which it is suitable to use a hot iron or burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for this, with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head down to the feet.
E io procederò in questo capitolo nella stessa maniera, affinché il richiedente venga sollevato da ciò, cioè da quanto avrà richiesto.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about the same thing as in the first chapter of cautery.
And because it is necessary that there be great care in this, for the operation which is very often seen in this chapter, namely evacuation by blood, which is with the blood in which life exists, you must have the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess, opening of a fistula, cleansing of the wound, extraction of an arrow, or incision of a stone, and similar things. And all these are accompanied by fear, trembling, and even death for the majority.
And I warn you not to fall into this situation, for sometimes it happens that you must manage patients with many illnesses in a manner similar to men who are very ill. And some of them will die from their illness, and it is a light thing for him to die, and this because of the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and with the illness there is fear which signifies death.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
And therefore it is not necessary for you to consent in that person who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than haste and greed; and do not presume any cause over this without appropriate certain knowledge which verifies what you need to do, and to whom a praiseworthy succession occurs.
And use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication for him to whom health is converted, because on that [patient] is your help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God grant you his understanding and do not take away your guidance and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
And I have organized this chapter by sections following the previous section on cautery, from the treatment of the head to the feet, so that what you seek and need about this may be made easier for you.
Chapter one.
About the treatment of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness frequently afflicts infants due to birth and when the nurse tightly binds the infant's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz;
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and the child's head was always so enlarged that he could not put anything on himself because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died out.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it is accumulated beneath the bone on the hip.
Because the operation in this case, where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, requires that you cut into the middle of the head with an incision in the latitude, and let the length of the incision be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions here according to this manner:
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you see all the sutures of the head open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from within, and nothing remains hidden to you. It is necessary that you cut into the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence line by line:
This sentence seems to describe another method of incision in the context of treating an abscess or boil (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest it causes bleeding and the patient dies from that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Two
When there occurs some catarrh or rheum in the eyes or feet and it is old, and one does not benefit from medication, then the final cure for this is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to incise those (arteries), have the patient raise their head and press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and on each of these places, which are near the ears, press, and they will be hidden in some men.
And then make an incision on the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the spatula that has been cut sharp for the incision, going into the bone, and let it be thus throughout the head.
And if you wish, introduce the spatula below the artery and break it at the incision points above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when some vein is cut, the blood flows out with a pulsating exit, which jumps outside with frequent jumps.
But if the artery is not visible at first glance, then you should measure from the ear the length of three fingers, and then probe with a needle, until it reaches the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be drawn is one-sixth of a pint, and it should be done lightly, neither more nor less, all according to the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of splintering on the bone, cut it open so that a hot abscess does not develop.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and linen cloths, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III
On the extraction of temples' arteries.
When someone has an old or acute migraine, due to humid and acidic qualities in the temples, or severe and similar pain, and it is not cured by the usual medical treatments, then we have recourse for these ailments to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or their cauterization, as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair on their temples; and consider the apparent arch in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the intensity of cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then let the patient's neck be tightened with some cloth; and immediately heat the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arch appears clearly to you. And then take the spoon, which has this shape: And then you scrape the membrane with that instrument until you reach the arch; and then you pour oil on it and extract it from the upper parts until you have removed it from the membrane and uncovered it from all the tissues that surround it.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (a type of hook or probe), and then cut off a piece according to the length of its extremities and their contraction, and there will be no flow of blood, for if not cut, the blood will not rise entirely.
And then proceed to evacuate some of the blood, approximately one to three pints.
And if the wound is large, then you should bind it in two places with a strong double-layered bandage or with ropes, and do not allow it to become infected before the wound heals, lest there be bleeding.
And then incise the superfluous part that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly thereafter.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a pointed cautery to the bone with a lancet until its extremities are incised, and this will take the place of that same procedure.
And this is a better procedure if the patient has a fever or is suffering from inflammation, for cauterization helps to expel moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
And it is appropriate to clean the wounds and cover them with clean cloths, and then treat them with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh and bandages until they are healed.
And if while you are working and another time bleeding occurs from the wound, then you must hasten to stop that blood flow, either with a cautery or by packing the wound tightly, and keep your hand pressed until the bleeding stops. And if no cause of that is present to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood clots, and rinse the spot with very cold water until the sharpness subsides, and apply a compress as needed.
And the easiest way to remove an arrow from the body is to cauterize the vein with this two-pronged cautery. First, feel for both ends of the arrow and place each prong, very hot, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of the arrow is lengthened, as they are not completely solidified by this cautery.
And this is how the cautery looks:
And let the sharpness of the two prongs be equal. However, if the sharpness of one prong is less than that of two prongs, it is better because if they are both very sharp and close to each other, they may cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire remains in them and the flesh is cut gently.
And this method is better for all tasks and easier.
And let the space which is between two fingers be equal to the thickness of the said finger.
Chapter four.
Of the care for the body from acute and acid tears of the eyes.
When the tears are acidic and it affects those veins that are on the top of the head outside, do not apply any medicine for its care. And sometimes the face of the patient is reddened and feels tingling, as if there were ants walking on their forehead, and the eyes of such a person are weakened, moist to the point that their lashes are falling out, and the eyelids are cut by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient physicians used this operation for the care of these cases, and they named this care with the sponge.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you cut into the forehead three equally spaced slits according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the slit is two fingers: let one slit be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the slight movement of the eyelids that are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three times the size of a thumb's width, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a sponge prepared or very dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two pointed ends, this is the shape of his incision: which begins at the temples and extends to the second incision. Remove all the skin that is between two incisions, and scrape with the scalpel on the bone, then do this from the middle of one incision to the other. And then insert this spatula into the first incision again, and introduce another instrument which is called a lancet, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
Place the sharp side against the skin next to the skin, and the other side against the bone, and use it to cut until you reach the middle crack, and with it cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
It seems that the text is discussing the process of creating or managing an incision. Here's my line-by-line translation:
And since a large quantity of blood is lost, press the places where the blood clots are.
And then place in each crack a piece of old cloth, and place over those clumps mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not become an infected abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment made of basil, rose oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V
Of the care of tears by catharsis and of the ulcers that descend from the inner parts of the head.
When someone has a severe and persistent catharsis, and the patient's eyes are weakened and shrunken, and their vision is impaired, and the eyelids have ulcers and their hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the front of the head with consequent protrusion, then know by these symptoms that the humors and catharsis come only from the small veins of the inner parts.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: tell the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in size (and begin with the incision from the left temple towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
"Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old cotton or linen rags. "And then cover it tightly with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that an abscess does not form.
"And when you release it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone within until flesh begins to grow on it, and then treat it with a drying regimen which will make the flesh grow, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from them make a plaster and apply it to these wounds for the growth of new flesh.
"Chapter VI.
"On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
"Everything that falls into the ears is of one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as a grain of millet or a bean; or it is a liquid thing, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or some small animal.
It seems that the text is discussing a remedy for earaches or similar issues. Here's a line-by-line translation: And next, place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circumference of the ear, and extend the ear to its original position above, because swollen parts are often healed with these remedies.
And if it is not healed, then administer an extraction using the instrument called "subtle gesti epicicarios," which has this form:
And if it is healed with the instrument, it is good; and if not, then administer an extraction using a thin needle of minimal thickness.
And thus, if it is not healed by this method, then make a cannula of iron and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole in the ear, and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula remains open. And then extract it with your breath using strong suction, for this is often done in the manner we have recounted.
But if it is not healed in this manner, then take some alum or wax with which birds are caught, and place a small amount on the tip of a reed, and then wrap a clean cloth around that reed. And then proceed to insert it in the ear canal gently, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And so if not forgotten with all the causes we've mentioned, then cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein according to their strength, and then have someone squeeze it between your hands and turn the ear towards its parts, and make a small incision at the back of the ear in a well-pinned place. And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then immediately close the incision at that time, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause of the condition in the ear is one of the growths that grows and swells, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you at once, then take fine white wax like this: And administer with that the poultice of that herb which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place that in many places, and then remove those with tweezers or with a delicate gesture, or as we have said, because its removal is relieved.
But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning with some condition, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if by this it is expelled, it is good; and if not, then take some small heated stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop with a stone until all the water is expelled.
Therefore, do not stop with a stone until all the water is expelled. And when the water has been expelled, take a piece of paper or cloth and insert one end into the ear, and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt to the middle.
And then place another bag and do this as many times until all the water has been expelled, and pierce that with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor.
However, in the case of a foreign body entering that ear canal, if it is a small object, similarly pierce and extract it as we have mentioned in the section above; but if it is a large object that causes pain within the head, then administer its extraction with tweezers and scissors, and the cause will be lighter than all other causes entering the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm generated within the ear, when you treat it with water as we have mentioned in the section and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not work, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine scissors; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow at the tip and wider above, which has this shape. And insert the narrow tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck out strongly with it, and do this many times until all the worms have been expelled.
Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
And it should be your instrument with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this tool, which looks like this: And make it of silver or iron, narrow at one end, with a small hole at the other end and flat on top.
And so that it fits well in the cavity of the ear canal where it will be needed. And if you wish, take a rag and wrap it around the end of the tool nicely, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear opening, or juice from some herb, or water with any of these medicines in the tube — which is in the ear —, then insert the rag-wrapped tool on top and press gently with your hand until the oil is released into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted into the ear should have been heated slightly by fire. And be sure that what you insert into the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII
Of the care for earwax in the ears.
Sometimes some infants are born with the bellies of their mothers not yet healed, and this also happens in some men, there is swelling in the flesh of the ear due to injury or something stuck in it; and sometimes this swelling occurs at the edge of the hole of the ear where it cannot see daylight, and sometimes it is on the outside parts.
And that which occurs in his brain, and cannot be understood by others, is among the most difficult conditions to heal.
And in that situation where you can understand the patient's speech, it is advisable to place the patient's ear towards the sun and observe them. And if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a thin spatula that matches its shape.
If the affected area is small and one side is sharp while the other is not, use a spatula that is two finger widths wide to avoid damaging the ear.
And if the swelling is due to excess flesh in the ear or nostril, then use a thin knife and cut away the flesh until all of it has been removed.
And if the swelling is in the ear's brain, then take a thin reed and heat it with fire for a short while, and then insert it into the ear's passage.
And if the swelling is with water that the patient has drunk easily due to thirst, try to relieve his pressure easily; and be careful not to harm the ear's nerves.
Based on the given text and its similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll provide a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
If blood flow occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment to restrain the blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
About the care of sty (stye) that appears on the eyelids.
Styes that appear on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist, other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or with your fingers, and carefully cut them with the tip of a knife, and then place something on the spots as described.
But if pain with blood flow occurs, then you should cauterize those with a fine pointed cautery.
The best way to cauterize is near the incisions, and if they recur too many times, it means that there is still some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that appears on the eyelids of the eyes.
Often there is on the eyelids of the eyes some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick liquid in the eyelids, both below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is to consider if the growth in them comes from what appears from the eyelid and is increased to every part; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision over it with a lancet through the length of it, and then explore it from all around with ease until you empty it, and then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
And if the growth is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, then no harm will come to you because of it, for the ointment of it will restore it and heal it.
And if the growth is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should look at its inner surface; then empty the eyelid and suspend the growth with a hook or another incision, and press it from all around; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this is of no benefit in any way.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that contains herbs until it is healed.
Chapter 10
About the treatment of acne on the eyelid above the eye.
Acne is a condition that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, especially in children, which irritates their eyes and causes cataracts to develop; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in them.
And for this reason you see these children often squinting, even when they sleep; and their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows, which are already swollen with inflammation, and the signs of acne become apparent in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel acne underneath.
And another way to perform this operation is for the patient to place their head on your shoulder; and then you place a cloth over them and make a circle around it according to the quantity that contains arteries from all sides, and then you place that over the acne and press with your fingers all around so that the acne is gathered in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp scalpel, making the cut as thin as possible, like the one made in phlebotomy.
"But it is necessary for you to cut the cord completely until you reach the intestines, because in the most serious cases, pus will seep out through a hole, following the appearance of white bile.
"Therefore, extract that pus with cloths which you have wrapped between your hands and roll it between your right and left hand until it is expelled.
"And make sure not to push into the hole with the spatula, so that you do not reach the intestine and cause damage.
"But if you see the intestine at the beginning of the hole, then gently push into the hole with a finger until some pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area, pressing them firmly.
"And also sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the hole to absorb any remaining moisture.
"And then care for it until it is healed.
"But if a boil forms in that place, then treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
"Chapter XI.
Sure, let's break down this sentence:
When pustules are born on the eyelids of the eyes due to the accumulation of foreign particles under natural hair and become old, then these affect the eye and cause various ailments such as persistent tears, softening of the eyelids, and a web-like growth in the eye, which is called a "huel tactinir". The treatment for this condition is carried out in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated with incision and suturing; or with reeds, as I will explain.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to place the patient's head in your lap; then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned back, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into that [eyelid] where there is pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate upward with thread, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the hair comes out — near the hair, and pull the thread to the upper part with the eyelid, and turn that [eyelid] with a ray.
Then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid below the accumulated hair with a spatula-shaped lacrimal instrument; and then extract the thread and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with a tent, and it should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
This is a complex sentence discussing eyelid surgery or manipulation. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then open with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, beginning from the larger tear duct and entering into the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, as it is in the case of the king (referring to a specific condition or body part named after a king).
And then place the knife in one of the two angles of the anus, and then excise it entirely, and then join with stitches the two lips with silk or fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere that which overflows from the threads on two eyebrows with some glue-like substance, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not bother.
And then remove the stitches after three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and cure it with something that dries and tightens, for the eyelid will be raised due to the healing of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better, as the ancients said in their writings.
But nevertheless, reassure the patient that it is a good operation and that there is nothing to fear.
And there is another method for treating [this condition], and that is to place [something] on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered needles according to this form:
But if this is not possible, hold the needles, and if it is not balanced, then take a needle with thread on it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and one near the smaller tear duct, and adjust the threads between these points equally. Then, using these threads, lift your hand with a smooth elevation, lift the entire tendon over which the figure is placed, as we have described.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess appears, make your incision or cut, and then seal the abscess with wax and similar materials, and with ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs are affected, then you should use on it what we have said about incision; but a stitch is more artful for each one.
It seems like you have provided an incomplete source sentence for translation. Could you please provide the full sentence so I can help you translate it? Certainly! Here's the translation of the provided text: And you have already cut the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Now add a small amount of this substance to the overflowing part of the eyelid, tightly compress each section with strong pressure, and leave it like this for several days, because the excess caused by the pressure will die and will be reduced until it falls off on its own.
But if it is delayed, then break it with the scissors, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, once it has healed, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not sting.
And this is the way to make two threads in the following manner: and let there be neither more nor less of its length and width.
Chapter XII
Of removing painful hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and painful to the eyes, then the operation is as follows: you should take a fine needle and place it in that vein of thin silk and linen, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be approximately one hand's width.
And quickly compose another fine thread underneath him, and if you wish, trim the ends of that one as well.
And then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be close to the sunlight so that your work may be visible, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate swiftly through the eyelid until you pull it out from above the natural hairline.
And then pull the hair out from above and insert it into tweezers, ensuring that the hairs are one, two, or three at most.
And then withdraw your hand with it until the hair is removed along with tweezers from the eyelid, leaving only the natural hair.
However, if the tweezers are pulled out and the hair is not removed, pull the tweezers back along with a thread that you have composed with it until it is pulled out from the upper opening.
And examine it with the eye, for when you pull out the tweezers and the thread, wipe each one clean and close the eye, leaving the closures in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
And if it is too short, then you adjust it with a long hair from the natural ones, and you raise it with that, or let it grow until it has lengthened sufficiently, and then you raise it.
Chapter 13.
About the care of cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
When cataracts appear in the eye and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes on one side or the other due to improper healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine cataract, whether it is natural or accidental. This cataract is caused by the scarring of wounds, incisions, or cauteries, or by their resemblance to those who have been poorly cared for.  (The phrase "lor malcuratz" seems to refer to patients who have not been well-cared for.)
The manner of the operation is that you cut through that scar and separate its lips, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use curatives for it from causes that dry or constrain, because if you do this, the cataract will return worse than it ever was before.
Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
And the treasure of your treatment is that you persevere with all skill, ensuring nothing remains unresolved according to the method stated at the beginning.
And this operation we have mentioned is nothing but a certain rectification of the halyacrax that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
About the care of hacrax, which is done in the lower eyelid.
This halyacrati, which is done in the lower eyelid and is rightly called halyacrati, has two types: some are natural, others accidental.
However, an accidental one is caused by a blow, or by a cut, or by a cautery, or by other similar things.
And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then gently stretch the skin at those points with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut off any excess with a broad spatula. And if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a reed and place it on the divided figure, and with it turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the inner side of the lower eyelid.
Sure, let's try to translate the sentence line by line:
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
Then cut the flesh to the length of the sharp blade below it, which should be the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; then treat them with the ointments mentioned for softening and warm compresses until they are healed.
And if an ulcer is caused by a tear or stitch or a burn, then you should make a flat cut with scissors along the eyelashes of the eyelid as described above. Then separate them with a warm compress between two lips as we said.
In the summary of the treatment for ulcers when they are above or below, the operation should proceed according to the preparation of the ulcer's shape, and that is in various forms.
And the wise craftsman always prepares an instrument in every possible way to return the figure to its natural form or as close as possible, and that patient according to what is convenient for them in the operation and with the best available instruments.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs to many people, so that the eyelid is solidified above the eye with albumen, and it is prevented from the ease of movement and its natural actions, then you must insert the tip of a ray under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with unguent.
Then you should carefully insert a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having a small blunt end so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation; and leave the spatula so that it does not harm the eye with its sharpness.
And let your incision be very careful so that it easily detaches that adhesion until the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and all the adhesions are healed.
And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it; or instill in it a solution of hyacinth dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a piece of linen, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use compresses until it is healed.
Chapter XVI
De la inflamación de una uña y del exceso de carne en las cejas.
Sepas que el dolor de una uña puede ser de dos maneras: o bien es nerviosa y similar a un aguijón delgado y duro; o bien no es nerviosa y similar a una humedad blanca congelada. Cuando toca, o se fuerza y se quita con una pinza, o se abre y la pinza no se coloca en ella.
Y ambas especies no comienzan sino desde el párpado superior, hasta que poco a poco cubre la vista y prohíbe la luz y el movimiento del ojo.
Pero el método para tratar la inflamación es que el paciente coloque su cabeza en tu regazo, y luego abras sus ojos, y levantes el párpado con tu mano, y luego tomes la uña con una pinza de dos puntas y extiéndela hacia las partes superiores. Y luego toma una aguja y coloca en ella un pelo de caballo o de buey o de vaca, o algo similar, o hilo fuerte, o dobla el extremo de la aguja poco a poco y colócala en el medio de la uña, y penetra con la aguja, y ata la uña con un hilo; y extiende aquello hacia las partes superiores, y excava con el pelo el extremo de la uña que es la pupila. And so you should continue with the same method by inserting the needle into his back.
And then you should cut the remaining part of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and clean the natural lacrimal duct to prevent continuous tearing from occurring.
And sometimes the nail with the sole of its onych (nail bed) extended or with pus, as we have said, and then it should be cleaned with a fine spatula, whose shape is this:
And be careful not to touch the corneal epithelium with the spatula and cause a tear, or perforate the pupil.
Then inject into the eye a little of finely ground salt or powder made from ashes, and let it stay there until the next day; then rinse it with water until it is healed.
And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not fixed in that onych (nail bed), then this type of nail should be treated with medicine, and it heals as I have described in the division.
And if you wish to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with sharp edges like this: This phrase seems to be missing a verb or context to fully understand its meaning. However, "subtilitat" is likely derived from the Latin "subtilitas," which means "delicacy," "fineness," or "acuteness." Thus, a possible translation could be: And if you notice that it is rarefied and concealed within it, then apply a mixture made of cinnamon or with chief root or with saltpeter to the wound, and cover the wound until the next day.
And then continue the operation on it until everything that is from it has been removed, except for any remaining pus in the wound, because if you leave it, and initially cure the pus until it is healed.
And then continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and incise it on one side, but do not finish the incision so that tears do not flow out.
And then apply to the lacrimal part a mixture of cinnamon and cinnamon oil until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of the eyebrow and of what is born of compressed flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the wounds of cuts, reddish flesh grows and it is covered until it covers the pupil, or it presses close to the eyelids and tightly closes the eyelids to the sides outside and it resembles the edge of a balustrade.
Here's the translation of the provided text:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Sure, here is my attempt at translating and interpreting the given medieval medical treatise:
Here's the translation of the given text:
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.
"Chapter Eighteen.
"From collecting wisdom in the eye.
"Wisdom comes from the veins of the eyes, which are closed over the eye and prevent the vision from working, and it blinds the eyes for many days.
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is wisdom is strong and there is no other illness in it except wisdom, then you collect that wisdom.
"And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with an inch or two, according to your judgment; and let that inch be of subtle doubling, like this:
"or two inches gradually in one piece, like this shape:
"And then those veins should be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you should wipe the blood from time to time until you see that those veins are removed from the eye and are rolled up.
"And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
And when you have completed [the procedure], then you distill into the head chiefly vinegar or rose water, so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been removed from the liver.
But if it is not possible to collect everything at once, then you apply a plaster with what gives relief from the pain on him, and leave him for some days until his pain has subsided and he is secure from an abscess forming.
And then you repeat the treatment on him in the same manner until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX
On reducing hernias in the nose.
When you cure hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine according to what has been described previously and it does not heal, then do not incise into it but rather make cuts over the abscess until its maturity is reached, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form:
And it is called a sharp probe, and it should be made of hard iron, and the tip should be round like this, which should be punctured with very fine holes (as shown in the following figure).
Here's the translation of the sentence:
And this is done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent substances.
Therefore, if the area is healed and good flesh has grown, and the body is separated from the infection, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen or become inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not wise to do anything except reduce the cleft to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: you uncover the bone with a file or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then take a piece [of skin] in this way:
Let the end of the chisel be triangular, and let its handle be first thinned out towards the end as follows:  (This passage describes how to shape a chisel for use in a medical procedure)
And then place that [chisel] on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal [bone]; and extend your hand a little towards the cheek, and then revolve your hand with the skin until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient will feel this as something comes out through their hand.  (This passage describes a medical procedure involving the use of a chisel)
Therefore, at that time, the area should be treated with astringent medicines, drying it as you have learned.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, at that time the matter which has been poured out to the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, it is easier on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the Reduction of a Nasal Polyp
When the nose protrudes entirely and no damage or diminution occurs in the vision, it is necessary to let the patient rest, and then follow them. Then you should apply cupping glasses on the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then place a liniment on the nose, which is made of acetra, aloe, lard, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the nose with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take many linen cloths and each cloth is folded in four layers; and make many of these.
Then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the nose needs. Then strengthen them with a hard cloth with strong pressure; and repeat the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let the nose remain tight for one day and night.
"However, if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
Then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the bandages and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter 21
On the incision of the uveal tract of the eye.
When there is a rupture in the uveal tract and it protrudes outward through the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its appearance is frightening to behold, if you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have described: that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from below upward, and then insert another needle from the lacrimal part, which has a double thread, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the protruding part of the uveal tract around the circumference of the needle, and tighten that very much.
And then remove the needle and place over the wound linen soaked in egg white, and let it sit until the thread dissolves with the egg white.
And then treat the wound with water that helps healing until the wound is healed.
And sometimes add from every part with a circle of cloth into the wound fit a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, and drain the moisture, and clean the wound and enter immediately.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of alconati (eye disorders).
This disease called alconati is nothing but water, which is attached to the eye like descending water and it is not that.
But the way to work on it is to have the patient sit on a clean and straight seat, then take their head in both your hands from two sides so that you see the water coming towards the parts below, and then dry it up and do not let it descend, and stop the light, and the patient will see the causes as they are seen.
And if it does not move downward, know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared with the water we mentioned, then have the patient sit between your hands and immediately take a thin spatula and place it over the fat tissue slightly above the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the desired location), until the pus is expelled.
Therefore, once it has been expelled, you should pour warm water over the wound in which you have mixed honey or in which you have previously boiled fenugreek and honey.
And it should be treated with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
On the treatment of water coming out of the wound.
As we have said before in the division and which one you should use to pierce with a needle, according to health.
Then have the patient sit between your hands on a chair and bind their wound tightly with a bandage.
And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of the wound if the wound is on the left side; or with your right hand if it is on the right side.
And now with your right hand take aloe if the wound is on the left side; or with your left hand if the wound is on the right side.
And then place the tip of aloe near the edge of the wound by the largest tear duct on the side where there is less tearing, and then apply the aloe with care and roll your hand with it.
And now penetrate into the wound and feel that aloe has reached its intended destination.
And it should be that the measure of aloe to the prion is the same as the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the edge of the wound; for you will see with that the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place the aloe inside the wound where there is water, and then you draw it down once, and then again another time; and if the water comes out quickly, then you can let the patient see with which eye he recovers his sight first, and the aloe in its wound.
And then wait a little while; and if the water has come out, then you remove that other time before the aloe is thrown out.
Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
"But we and those of our time use an egg white ointment on that wound.
"And if your assistant does not obey you during the treatment of the wound due to its hardness—for there are some men whose skin is very tough—then it is necessary for you to take the plaster which is called albard and which has this form:
"Therefore, pierce the wound with that, and do not extend your hand into the opening, so as to make a subtle path for your assistant.
"And then have your assistant proceed as we have said.
"And you must complete your work by preparing a decent bed for the patient to sleep on their back in a dark room, and they should be restricted from all movements.
"And place on his body what is necessary to purify his nature, and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
"And let the bandage be according to its position until the third day.
"And then unbind him in that dark room and expose his weakened eyes to the sight of some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after the infusion. It is appropriate that you remove this because water can act slightly more strongly and more intensely due to the cauterization.
However, if an abscess forms from the cautery, then it is necessary to open the wound before the seventh day, and treat it with water that can dissolve the abscess.
Then you should clean the wound and place a cloth over his face, through which you can guide his breathing for several days, keeping him in the darkest place.
And then he should be gradually removed from that dark place and returned to normal conditions.
And know that in surgery the student is not exempt from seeing certain things, and then you should be brave regarding the operation.
And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and someone said that he made fire in the air with a magnifying glass through which water was drawn.
However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magnet for whoever does not know them:
And they should be made of iron or steel properly, and their ends should have this delicate triangular shape, with the pointed end like this is the form.
### Chapter XXIV
### About the treatment of flesh eaten away in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse fleshy growths, one of which has a cause similar to a scorpion's sting or a polypus; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles that fish. And if it is cancerous flesh, pale and of dark color; and if the flesh is like a lion, not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is among these lions' flesh (non-fraudulent and non-cancerous), it is necessary for the patient to sit between your hands and place in the sun, and have their nostrils washed, and you should prick them with your onyx needle into those fleshy growths. ️ And then remove it from the parts outside, and then cut that which you have grasped with those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part into another until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any cause remains of which the excision is possible, then rinse it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing remains. ️ Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
And then place something in the nose close to the incision with vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the mouth, then know that it is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that there is flesh rotting in the upper bones of the nose, to which the abscess has not yet reached.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into the wound, which has some thickness, and insert needles into it, and place between each needle the amount of a finger or a half, and tell the patient to swallow one end of the fat into the nose with the finger or with something else that is possible for him.
And after this is done, let the patient sniff his odor until it reaches the nasal passages, and let it drip into his throat, for many times children at school do something similar to this action, and it is an easy thing to do for someone who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a piece of meat with the needles that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the meat is already stuck to the needles of the fat.
And then extract the bile, and place near the nostril a cloth for bloodletting, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that remains of the flesh.
And then at the end of the procedure, place a lead tube in the nostril for several days until it is healed.
However, if the patient requires drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the shape of the instrument used for making head-purges with which oils and medicines are administered in the nostrils.
And make it of silver or iron, which should be similar to a small open lamp, also like a small basin, and the mouth in the same way.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and let the tip of the head-purge instrument be flat and open; at the end of which there should be a handle, with which you can hold it when you pour into it oil or water, or whatever substances and suckable causes you want.
Chapter 25
From the nails in the extremities of the nose.
It is often seen that there is a nail in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days when most people do not consider it important.
And for that reason, you should inquire about its beginning and origin, and understand everything about it. Then place a cautery or burning medicine on the area where it was located.
However, if its appearance is delayed until it becomes large, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, of dark color and with little feeling. If so, do not touch it with iron, for it is a cranky abscess; for many times that person who inquires about this abscess will receive great harm from the one on whom it was located.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not of dark color, and if it is possible to inquire about it at any time, then evacuate the patient and inquire about it without fear, and treat the area with a drying and constricting agent until it is healed.
Chapter 26
On the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by wound or resemblance.
You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, it will not affect the operation much except in some men.
Therefore, when something happens to someone due to one of those causes, consider if it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then care for it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the rupture are already separated and each is healthy, then you should scrape off each divided part of its skin until blood comes out. And then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of that sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and trisas, and place over the powder a thin plaster of emplastrum diaphoreticum or any other consolidating plaster, and leave it for two or three days, and then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the sutures are absorbed by themselves, and then care with ointment until it is healed.
But the method of suturing is that you approximate the rupture with needles in the same way as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen, or approximate the rupture with thread as you have been taught.
Chapter XXVII.
About removing those causes which come in the two lips of the internal parts.
Some men see in the inner parts of their lips certain hard, fat-like nodules, and some are smaller and others larger.
Therefore you should turn the lips and folds each of those hardnesses in every way, and then you should drain the abscess until it is empty of pus, and then wash it with vinegar, and treat the place with water that has been boiled down, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
About incision of the attached flesh in the gums.
Many times people see on the gum a fleshy growth called albulus by the ancients. Then you should suspend it with tweezers or something similar to scissors and incise it along its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow out.
And then place on the area boiled-down lard or other styptic or astringent powder.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter 29.
On the reason for toothache with fever.
When on the surface of the teeth—both the inner and outer parts, as well as between the gums—rough, sharp, dark scabs appear, sometimes blackish, and become yellow or green before corruption reaches the gum and the teeth become loose.
Therefore, it is necessary that you rinse the patient’s mouth with your hands and place their head in your lap, then scrape the teeth where those scabs appear until there is no trace left, which will remove the blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations until they are clean.
Therefore, if this treatment works and the condition improves as at the beginning of the reason, it is good; but if not, then you repeat the treatment on those teeth for another day and the second and third days until it comes to the final result that you desire.
And know that teeth require many different types of scrapers with various shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And because the scraper with which the tooth is scraped from the inside is different from the one used between the teeth according to other shapes, and these shapes of scrapers should be prepared as you will see next:
It seems like you are referring to the title or numbering of chapters in the medieval medical treatise. In this case, "Capitol .xxx." can be translated as:
"D’eradicacio de dentz." translates to "About the extraction of teeth.
"Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu." translates to "It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in extracting it, for there is no reason that replaces its usefulness when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance until it is removed from the extraction.
"Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies." translates to "However, when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract it but then the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen through the work of barbers.
"Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas." translates to "Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula containing some virtue, until it is dissolved from all parts of the gum, and then remove it with your words, or with subtle forceps little by little until you have removed it.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, place it under the patient in such a way that all parts are released with ease and effort, removing it as was done at first.
But if the tooth is crooked or corroded, then you should fill that cavity with cloth and tighten it with a thin rope to prevent it from being shattered during your constriction with pliers.
And it is necessary that you act very carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to break it off from the tooth, returning to the patient for the malice that the pain may be greater than before.
And beware not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their recklessness and audacity regarding tooth extractions, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring great evils upon the sick, which are more difficult than if the teeth were shattered, and all or some of these reasons: that you extract that along with some bones from the jaw as well, just as we have testified many times.
And at that point, cleanse the mouth of the patient with wine, or vinegar mixed with salt.
And if there is bleeding or many visible blood vessels, then sprinkle some lime on the wound and, if that does not help, use a cautery.
The form of the forceps and fine pliers with which the tooth is initially extracted should have a long handle, short shaft, and be thick so that they do not bend when used for this purpose.
And the handles should be of such thickness that when squeezed with them they are not bent, and they should have short tips.
And they should be made of Indian steel with straight tips, and on the tips of these there should be teeth that fit into each other and hold strongly by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these should be in the shape of a stork's beak, which is curved, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31
On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken jawbones.
When you need to extract a broken tooth that remains in place, it is necessary for you to apply a compress with a border around the area for one or two days until the location becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or heron, similar to the shape of forceps:
"Their extremities should be made from within like a file or sandpaper.
"And if you do not comply with this by means of these forceps or tongs, then you must cut through the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce the instrument called atali, which is a small lever, and its shape is as follows:
"And it should have a small, thick handle, so that it will not be bent.
"Therefore, if the root is pierced by this means, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: The form of the first instrument is a triangular tip with some thickness:
"The form of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and more delicate tip.
"And you are helped with this instrument, which has two hooks, whose form is approximately as follows: "And with other instruments which will be used for the scraping of teeth; because this instrument is also made like a large onion, and this is its form:
"Of the triangular tip that is twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
And you should know that the tools for tooth extraction are similar and resemble other tools.
But the skilled and knowledgeable artisans in this art find on their own according to what the operation and various diseases indicate; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not designate or use specific instruments, due to the different forms of various species.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken or fractured, then it should be treated with instruments and forceps that are appropriate for the situation, as we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots. Assist him with this gesture, which looks like this:
And it should be gradually reduced in size, and held with the mouth so that it does not become inflamed or slip away until the bone is completely reset; and then restore the area with appropriate medicine for this purpose.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away that fracture and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
Of the care of protruding teeth over others.
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
And let your incision be made with that which you have used to cut for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and make sure none of the other teeth are damaged.
And if it is an exposed tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
And let both the file and the margin be made of Indian steel; and let it have small points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out. Then draw it to a point at the end, and scrape it with sharp rasps.
And if it is a tooth that has been chipped or cracked and it bothers the tongue, then you should file that part so that the roughness of that piece is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not get cut and speech is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
On restoring decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
When the front teeth are damaged or knocked out by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew properly, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then in order for them not to fall out, place fillings in those that are strong, using gold rather than silver, because silver turns black and soon crumbles after a few days, but gold never changes.
And let the fat be in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the manner of preparing it is that you take the fat and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then increase with two twists of the fat between two molars, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then gently insert the needle into the area where the problem began, strengthening your hand with care and skill to avoid aggravating the condition.
And use the thread which you have used to sew the teeth, so that it does not loosen.
And then cut the ends of the excess thread with scissors or forceps, and wrap them around each tooth, hiding them between the healthy tooth and the affected one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it thus tightly bound as a Roman would do.
But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same manner at all times.
And this is the method for teeth and the technique of aligning two healthy teeth with two affected ones, as you see these bound together.
And when one or two teeth are returned to their original position, cast them again in the same way as we have described, and they will improve.
And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use cow bone for some cause, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitulum .XXXIV
Of the swelling that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
This swelling that appears under the tongue at times is either natural and congenital or accidental and happens due to a healed wound.
And the operation on it is as follows: open the mouth of the patient and have their head held up; raise their tongue, and then incise that swollen nerve according to the size until the tongue is freed from its tightness.
But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you should apply oil and cut through it until you have incised the swelling and dissolved the knot.
And be careful that a fissure is not made in the flesh, and that you cut only the skin so that there will not be a flow of blood.
And then wash the traces of the incision with water or vinegar or cold water; and then place a liniment under the tongue; this is what you should use to hold the patient's tongue down every night, so that it does not become tightened again another time.
But if there is a flow of blood, place crushed vitriol on the spot; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with an old cautery which is appropriate for this purpose. And continue treating with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter 35.
About the removal of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small swelling appears under the tongue, preventing the tongue from functioning naturally; and quickly it grows until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sunlight and observe the abscess.
And if you see it is dark in color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it turns white, indicating the presence of pus, then you insert a scalpel into it and cut it with a fine spatula, dividing it completely; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place crushed vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work until you have completely removed it, until it has been washed with strong vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other appropriate remedy until it heals.
It seems like you have provided a chapter or section number rather than a full sentence for translation. Could you please provide the actual text that needs to be translated?
Certainly! Here's the translation of the sentence:
When a lump appears in the throat, it is called glandulas which resemble cotton and appear outside, and they are named two auricles (earlobes). If you treat them with the water we mentioned earlier in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess (apostema) is hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. Then do not touch it with iron (a tool used for lancing).
And if it is of red color and the root (base) is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; rather let it mature inside first, and then either you will lance it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin, then that is what should be incised (lanced).
And the operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the apostema has already repaired itself with complete rest or if it has diminished with some reduction; then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open his mouth, and a servant taking between their hands presses the tongue down, using an instrument that is very noble in form.
And let it be made of silver or gold, and let it be as thin as a knife.
So when you press the tongue with your finger and reveal the abscess, then place your thumb over it. Take a lancet and insert it into the abscess, and draw out the pus to the extent that you can. Another thing that may cause pain in the tunic, and then make an incision with this tool:
Another thing that may cause pain in the tunic, and then make an incision with this tool: which is similar to forceps, but with curved ends so that the opening of each one faces the other, and very sharp, made of iron.
But if this tool is not available to you, then make an incision with a spatula like this one: and let it be sharp on one end and blunt on the other end.
And after you have made one incision, make the other according to the same manner of incision, and then let the patient heal with cold water.
But if there is bleeding, let the patient heal with water from a decoction of pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, similar to other styptic substances, until the bleeding stops, and then continue the care until it is healed.
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
Based on the context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And the abscess had already grown so much that it took two months before it burst through two openings.
Therefore, I cauterized the fistula and placed it in one of their fingers, pulled it out, and a large portion was removed from them. Then I cut that part where I understood the other opening to be, and then I forced open their mouth, compressed their tongue, and placed the finger in that abscess.
Then I cut out a large part of it, and hardly any blood flowed from it. Therefore, the woman's condition improved, and she began to drink water and eat food immediately. Since I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times for a long time, another abscess occurred in its place, which I continued to cut until it extended.
Therefore, I took courage and cauterized the wound, so that it would heal from there on; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done for me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the cutting of a boil when it becomes suppurative.
When they say the boil is suppurative and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thicker and rounder part, then it is called a carbuncle.
Certainly! Let's translate the text step by step:
Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence step by step:
And it is necessary that you do not insert anything into it except what is naturally fitting without addition, because if you insert more than necessary, you will hinder the natural flow.
And for the insertion, use what we have recommended for the insertion of two needles, and make sure it is properly secured until it is healed.
However, if the patient is frightened by the insertion, you must use cunning in cauterizing him without fear. The manner of the cautery on him is only with hot water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take some of the said water from the chapter on cauterization, and make a living wax seal with it. Place it not too thick or thin, and with this fill the cavity of the instrument, which has the following shape:
The end of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the lip, and have the patient lean back so that saliva or mucus from his mouth will flow due to the internal medicine, preventing any cause from coming out onto his throat and causing him discomfort.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and press that on the uvula for about half an hour until you see it become blackened and subdued by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the reed. Submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cotton into a cannula until the cotton adheres to the cannula. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the uvula. Then leave it alone so that it dries up and falls off in about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. Then, after cauterization, clean around the uvula with cotton dipped in warm water, and rinse with that water, which is mixed with the medicine. Wash with cold water, then treat from the outside with a compress, and from within with gargles until it heals.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something thinner than cautery and incision, because it is treated with subfumigation in this way: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, dried raisins, chamomile, broom and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients, or some of them, into a pot. Submerge them in strong wine, let it boil; the pot should be well sealed with clay, and there should be a small hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave iron instrument is placed like this; it can be made of silver or iron.
And the extremity should be placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula, so that the uvula becomes quite obscured.
And then rub the affected area until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, as it would cause too much pressure on the abscess, and you should not do this unless you have the consent of the patient's doctor.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and place on its tip a clove of garlic, so that the patient's mouth may be protected, because the garlic clove prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is beneficial to health.
Chapter .xxxviii
About the removal of thorns and other adhering objects in the throat, and about other causes.
Certain marks appear on the throat, or a thorn from a fish bone, or some other cause.
Then you must remove whatever is visible from those marks, and press the tongue forward with an instrument, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat must be made to vomit by the patient before the food has descended into the stomach, because strongly connected to the throat are the thorns, which are expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of soap or lettuce root, or a lump of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge and soak it strongly in oil, then have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located, they will be extracted. And take an eel and tie it in oil, and place it inside the mouth, and let it be sucked out with the sucking action; or take a leek and put it into the mouth, and then pull it out.
But if they are not extracted with these causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a finger, and at the end of it let there be a concavity which you insert into his throat easily.
And let him raise his head upwards, and be careful that the touch of his throat bone does not cause harm or injury to him, or that it pierces a bone or spine, or that the physician with his hand.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Chapter 39
Of the removal of a leech attached to the gullet.
When the leech is treated with water as mentioned in the division of care with medicines and not iron tools, consider then in the gullet of the patient on the tongue, after you have compressed the tongue with an instrument that we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or a fine, delicate instrument.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this until (the leech is dead and comes out of the gullet) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water and open the patient's mouth in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of that water, but spit it out after an hour or so, because the leech as soon as it feels the water runs away.
"However, if it is not forgotten with the aforementioned substance, then fumigate the patient with mace or asafoetida through the instrument we have mentioned for the fumigation of the uvula.
"Do this, and you will have success in whatever you attempt.
"And there is another way of performing this fumigation: take a bowl with burning coals inside it, and cover the bowl with a lid that has a hole in the middle; place the end of the instrument through this hole. Then begin the fumigation; have the patient put their mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that it has reached the blood vessel, because the blood vessel will quickly fall.
"And if it does not catch [the blood vessel], then you must repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking; let them eat salty and dry foods, and do not give them water, and with this treatment the condition will be forgotten.
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting of the goiter is performed when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there are some curves in it: Sure, I'll do my best to translate the sentence into English:
"Chapter Forty
"In which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
"Abscesses are various species of various kinds, according to the memory of them, each discussed in this book.
"And they are diverse in their incision and treatment through two methods, one of which is according to the type of abscess itself, and the other according to what we understand about the fluids.
"And the second method is according to the parts of the body in which they occur, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from one occurring in a joint; and each has its own treatment according to the location.
"And there are some abscesses which must not be incised except when the pus has matured or reached its peak.
"There are other abscesses which should be incised when they are fresh and not yet matured to their fullest extent, such as those occurring near joints; for an abscess near a joint has its existence prolonged until it can spread to the surrounding area, and easily the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay incising it until it becomes mature in the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, then incise it even if not yet matured, but do not incise it while fresh and undigested except for those near the buttocks, to prevent its pus from spreading within the buttocks and causing a fistula, or so that it does not heal in its place. It seems that the text is written in a language with strong Romance influence, likely some form of medieval Latin or a related Romance language. Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And know that it is mature when there is the abatement of pain and the ceasing of fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the boil, and other signs.
And be aware that the perforation should occur below the boil and from where the pus comes out, in order to achieve a cure from the prominence.
And the perforation should always be along the length of the flesh or body, if the boils are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the areas of the wrists, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places except those that reflect, for in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that limb.
But when the boil is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave its perforation open until its digestion has been confirmed by time, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the body of the pus and much filth are prolonged, and the edges of the boil become hardened and deep.
However, some boils are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body, as necessity requires, or according to what the limb needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large and wide puncture or several incisions according to the size of the abscesses.
And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary that the blade be concave and cut, when done this way, it is done so that it does not hurt, as with those that occur in cases of double boil or buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a triangular section; and of these is one which is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the buttocks.
And there are those in which a round section or lunar section is administered, and similar to these.
But in the case of superficial abscesses such as lion's teeth, it is necessary that you puncture them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you puncture it and do not worry about extracting all of the pus at once; having extracted part of it, and then close the abscess again for another day, and then extract a larger portion, and then do this many times according to degree until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in poor health, because the vital spirit often leaves with the discharge of the blood, and the patient dies quickly, and you open the veins.
And take great care with this chapter, and when making the perforation in which you make these incisions, it is necessary that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then you should administer oil of lilies or ancient cotton; and if the abscess is large and the openings of the perforation are many, then you must place cotton in each opening until they come out together.
And if in the abscess a piece of intestine has been cut or is concave within it, then you must fill it with old cotton or a thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have pulled out bread or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that until the third day; and then proceed to process and cure it with water suitable for ointments until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding during your operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar, in which you soak a linen cloth, and place it on the area of the bleeding many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary for you to administer remedies and treatments, as well as the powders that have been recommended in many places in this book of ours, under the division (or heading) [specific topic].
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary for you to soak powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the affected areas are fleshy, then it is necessary for you to apply powders soaked in water or oil (or wine and oil), and do this until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary for you to open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer a treatment that is appropriate for the patient until they are healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general. But as I have already said, according to the method of distinction, each type of abscess should be treated differently, as discussed specifically under individual headings.
Chapter .41
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, there are small abscesses, and these are species of nodes that contain tunics; the species of these are moving.
And they have pustules, from which comes moisture similar to pus. And these contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and from these come the hard stones.
And in the cutting of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, because their extraction does not cause a reaction.
And the operation in cutting these is that you should touch them with an instrument of which the form approaches as follows: called entromes, so that it may contain.
Because if what is contained is moisture, then cut it along its length with a superficial section in this manner:
And begin the incision from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Therefore, when the moisture has been evacuated, then you should scrape away that which contains the moisture, and leave nothing of it at all, because if there remains any cause, too often does it return.
And then submerge the area in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill it with this mixture and let it sit until the next day, because with water you dissolve all that is underneath that skin layer.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly and thoroughly to that area if needed, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause underneath that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess has fatty knots, then you should cut it according to this method: with a cut in the shape of a cross, and make an incision between the two lips of the cut, and draw it out from all sides, and strive to remove the membrane that contains it.
But if your archery faces resistance, then do as I first told you.
Similarly, perform the incision and treatment on the stone-like abscess as we have told you; the incision on a stone-like abscess is lighter because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are abscesses of this type that are in the head of some people with whom there is no moisture; the reason for this is that I once made an incision on an abscess in the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a deaf, rough, white stone that could not be broken, and if anyone struck it with that, they would hurt themselves.
Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence:
And close the puncture from those on the lower part of them, so that the body may be relieved from sickness in the lower parts.
Then treat them with water that is suitable for healing.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Often these tumors appear in the neck and armpits and groin area, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are similar to many others, and all of these tumors develop inside their own capsule, just as we have described for nodes and tumors of the head.
There are many types of these tumors, for some are hard and stony, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, if you see that the one you are examining is well-positioned for treatment, and its color resembles that of codena, and it is mobile in all directions, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the arteries, and it is not fixed in place, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above downwards on the body, between the line of G and the line of B, and remove it completely, and extend the lips of the codena with one or more oncis as needed, just as we have said for tumors of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautionary that neither the vein nor nerve be severed.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut into your hand during incision, or disturb the patient, and do not cut anything that is not necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from operating, then apply to the wound trissated vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, and bandage the wound, and allow that which reduces the acuity of the inflammation and softens the wound and begins to putrefy. When the blood is released.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with the patient's tongue if there is any reason for the other small scrofulas; therefore cut and clean those as well.
And if there is a large vein near the scrofula, it is advisable not to cut that scrofula from its root. Beforehand, it is better to bind it tightly with a strong bandage and leave it until it falls off by itself without harming the patient.
And then fill the wound with cotton wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scirrhus (a hard lump formed by disease), then you should sew together the two lips of the wound and suture it immediately, so that there is no remaining surplus.
But if you see that there is still excess due to the size of the scirrhus, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut off the root of it, and then draw it out and administer a suture as mentioned before.
And for those scirruses which contain moisture, you should puncture them with a superficial puncture at the place where they appear to be most mature, and make the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below the body, as we have said.
And then administer a puncture, using needles and similar ointments, so that it corrodes whatever remains of the corruption. And then, when you see that the wound has been cleansed, at that time you should cure it with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43
"When the pus of an abscess is drained from within the mouth.
"The ancients said that this incision should be made in the tonsils, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done so.
"And here is the transcription of their discourse.
"However, in men with phlegm, the removal of the tonsils should be avoided because it can cause harm due to the fact that all the main veins of the patient are located there.
"However, in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth, throat, or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the incision of the tonsils to avoid the loss that occurs from suffocation.
"Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the tonsils below three or four small circles of the tonsil's circles, through the thickness between two circles, so that the incision is in the cartilage, not in the cartridge. And this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are close to the surface.
"And if the doctor is timid, he should then extend the neck with his thumb, and immediately cut through the neck until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of them.
And then you should incise the lip according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal for the inflammation which is of that issue with water that is from him disrupted and by the absence of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it up with only that thread, without the cartilage.
And then administer medications that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
And Al-Zahrawi says that the summary of this advice which we have given is nothing other than to see that some of these apostemas have already taken the throat of the patient and the patient has come close to death, and his soul has dried up, and some people go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound for some breathing, and be saved from death.
And for this reason he ordered the wound to be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and therefore then he commanded that the wound be sewn up, and cared for it until it was healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut her throat with it, severing a part of the lung, and I was called to care for her. When I arrived, I found her as if she were dying, uncovered the wound, and found the blood which was flowing from the wound slowly.
Therefore, I concluded that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming out of the wound, so I treated her until she healed.
And the servant did not speak hoarsely or in a weak voice, and after a few days she recovered her usual strength.
And now I say that in the section of the epileptic [patient] there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On incision of an abscess that occurs in the neck outside, which is called a neck hernia.
This abscess named neck hernia is quite large according to the complexion of the body, and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to cure [it].
And the accidental (condition) is of two kinds: one resembles large knots, and the other resembles an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, which is feared. And it should not be presumed (to treat) in him with iron, except in the case that it is small. And you should pursue that and investigate it with the said (method), and if you find it resembling large knots, and it is not connected to any of the veins, then you should incise it just like the knots, and extract it with water that contains the peel of pear and burdock; but if not, then explore its entire being, and subsequently cure the area with water suitable for healing until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On the cutting of the different types of knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division (section).
And it is fitting that I also explain the difference between a knot and an excrescence, so as to avoid confusion.
Therefore, I say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the excess fluid subsides; and it is a complete putrefaction, which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
"However, if there is no heat, fever, or pain, then consider that condition to be the proper one for the lion's cub.
"And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese, made in this way: whether it is larger or smaller, they are of two types, because they can be fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said before in the division.
"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called an introme, as will be explained in the following chapter.
"And this is the manner of inquiry for all apostemas and nodes: you must take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part of the apostema, and then slowly revolve the said instrument until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
"Then press with your hand according to the size of the apostema, and then remove the instrument and observe what has exited in its wake.
"And if the liquid is watery and of any color, then you should incise it with a shallow cut, as I have said for other apostemas.
And if there is no moisture from the trace of the entrance, then know that it is fat.
And dry on him I dry with the form of a cross according to this shape: As you have been taught, and suspend that one hanging down, and peel the cord from all around with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if possible, on top of it, and draw out that corruption with the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens this way, and then you extract it by force until nothing remains of it.
Because if any part of it remains, little or much, the knot returns according to the most.
And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and bind the wound, and place on it a cautery to prevent an abscess from forming, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then you sew up both lips of it and treat it with a remedy that promotes healing.
But if there is an artery or a vein opposite it, then you cauterize and fill the place with powdered vitriol, leaving that narrow for two days or three until the wound softens and the boiling of the blood subsides; and then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of the necessary instruments in sectioning and perforation.
The shapes of these instruments are of three types: large, medium, and small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, with sharp tips, so that the instrument fits well into the incisions.
And these are the forms of the instruments, which are called albera, and one of them is called bistoury.
And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Therefore, they should be used for incisions, openings, fistulas and abscesses, especially when there are bones or other causes involved.
And they are made round, thick, long, like large needles with which sails are sewn together, and they are made of bronze or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of bronze.
And the experiments of black plumage are performed, which align with the opening of the fistulas in the cavities where the reflections reside, so that they may be reflected back with their lightness by those reflections.
And [choose] from three types, for some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the great lead experiment:
Form of the medium lead experiment:
Form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the needles are of many types, for some of them are simple, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And there are curved needles, and they are of three types.
And among those are curved needles with two curvatures, and they come in three sizes.
And there are also those which have three curvatures, and they come in three sizes.
And all of these are necessary in their respective places.
Shape of a small simple needle, its shape:
**Form for a large ointment with two curved edges:** **Form of a medium-sized ointment with two curves:** **Form for a small ointment with two curved edges:**
**Form of a large ointment with three curves:**
**Form for a medium-sized ointment with three curves:**
**And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and apostemes are cut and scraped, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.**
**Form of a large scalpel:**
**Form of the medium-sized scalpel:**
**Form of the small scalpel:**
**The tips of these scalpels with which sections are made are sharp, and the other tips are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that it is done for fear of cutting a vein or nerve while scraping the nodes, and thus the patient may find some relief from the heat caused by the scraping of the apostema.**
**And these are the forms of almagidas, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.**
They are made of iron and have the appearance of a king, with which they make an alchemist's furnace.
And it is in the left side that is pricked with a needle, hidden by a bandage, and from there it goes to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as often as you wish.
The shapes of needles, which are hidden between the fingers for the piercing of boils, and the patients do not feel them, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those (needles):
The shapes of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is removed, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
They are made of thin iron, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And you must have these sizes of cupping glasses for your large, medium and small ones, so that through them you can quickly cut off the flow of blood in case of necessity, and then it will not be the first medicine for you.
"However, do not use it to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and use it only on fleshy places, such as on the thighs and hips, and on the arms, breasts, stomach, and ankles, similar to their fleshy flesh.
"At other times these instruments are made smaller, similar to the heads of needles, following this form; through which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
"And at other times they are made round, following this form:
"Chapter XLVII.
"On the care of men's breasts that resemble women's.
"Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell due to lack of sleep when they begin to become flabby, and then the breasts also swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming firm and hairy.
"And for those who suffer from this, it is necessary to incise that area with a lunar section as follows: from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove all the fatness, and then fill the wound with red medicinal ointment, and then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the pattern you've established, here is my best attempt to translate the provided sentence:
Capitolo XLVIII (Chapter 48)
About the perforation of abscesses that come from tickling (itching).
These abscesses that come from itching are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a bag full of pus.
And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything that is in the abscess from the pus has been evacuated, then fill it with old cotton wool and leave it alone until the next day.
And then remove the cotton and treat [the area] with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of swellings or scrofula, then you should cut it open in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
But if the wound is so extensive that gangrene may occur, then administer cautery on it as we said earlier.
Capitolo XLIX (Chapter 49)
About the section of abscesses that occur due to archery or a vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the cord which lies on top of it becomes solidified, then serious boils occur, known as inflammation and abscess. For the signs by which inflammation and abscess are recognized to be either from an artery or a vein: because when the abscess is from an artery, it extends lengthwise along the body; and if you press on the abscess with these words, you feel in it a certain whistling sound.
And that which is from a vein appears as a round swelling on the body.
And incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in those below the armpits, in the groin, in the neck, and in many other parts of the body; and it is very dangerous, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or on the head must be avoided.
However, on those caused by the inflammation of the opening of an artery, make a section in the cord along its length; and then widen the section with hooks near the artery, until you have freed it from the tunic so that it is laid bare.
And then place on it a needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and ligate the artery with double thread in two places — which I have used for you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then puncture the area that is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood in it has come out and the abscess has been dissolved.
And then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess caused by the drying of a vein, then you must have water within your reach that is as close as possible to the abscess with a cord, and then insert the needle under the area where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the ligature of the grape with two parts and two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert a needle with wax under all of the abscess until the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part until when what is inside it has come out, then you incise the superfluity of the cord and let what is connected to it go.
And then place on the wound the cloth which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with clay and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter One of the abscess that occurs due to a twist of the nerves.
Thus, an abscess can occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when there is a blow to them or excessive labor, and by similar means.
And it most commonly occurs in the areas of the ankles or soles, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of other parts of the body, and in its most severe condition without fever, when it is very narrow, the patient feels something like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that accumulates in the front of the body, and therefore the neck is left out, as it is located in all other parts but does not move forward or backward.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be filled with iron, because it will easily become contracted.
But that which is on the head or forehead should be cauterized without a spatula. "But if it is an abscess, then take that with the scissors and incise it carefully.
"And if it is large, then suspend that with hooks, and scrape that away, and immediately remove that; and close the wound with stitches, and treat that until it is healed.
"Chapter II.
"About the incision of an abscess which occurs in the chest, which also occurs in the abdomen.
"It is advisable to cut many abscesses found in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble mushrooms, from which the root is fine and the head is large; and already their lips have turned black, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very significant.
"And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two of these things which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those and the whites, of small root.
"And already their lips had turned black and split open, and moisture ran from it constantly.
"Therefore I incised those and found in one a scorpion with eighteen stings, and in the other a scorpion with six stings.
And the operation in their incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of subtle nature; then you incise them with a wide spatula, and let there be in your presence cauteries in the fire, because often you must expel much blood from it; and if blood comes out, cauterize that area.
And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incising with iron; but rather take freshly made lead plaster, and strengthen that swelling with it, in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
And then tighten the lead wire in the constriction; then do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on it, until it is cut and falls off by itself without effort.
But if it is of great size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its incision, and especially in those that are in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you can incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until the wound is healed.
And be careful that you do not dare to cut off any of them which are dark in color, with little feeling, and great regard, for those are like cancerous growths.
And I will come to mind with the memory of crab nearby as well.
Chapter 52.
Of the treatment for inflammation of the navel.
Inflammation of the navel is caused by several factors: either by fissures in the cipher which is on the belly, and from it comes out the intestine or hernia as happens with other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously stated, or by trapped gas within it.
But if it is due to a fissure in the cipher and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and it is soft without pain, and appears in various situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its condition with what we have mentioned above is of greater diversity and intensity, and when you press on that area as described, it becomes hidden and returns; and it is very light with it, and the entrance of the bath and intense labor are greatly increased.
Based on the pattern and the context of the previous translations, let's attempt to translate this line by line:
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs you should identify the abscess by its darkening color.
But if it is due to flesh, then it is a serious, large and hard abscess, and it is fixed according to its quantity.
But if it is due to gas, then touching it will be painful.
And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for in this there is fear and dread, as has been taught to you in the chapter where I have said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their legs together and lie extended; and then feel with your hand all around the navel, and then order them to turn between your hands on their back, and then circumscribe with a wide spatula all around the navel over the place that you have felt with your hand; and then extend most of the abscess above with a large hook; and then bind it around with a strong ligature or with silk in the proper manner.
And then carefully extend the pus of the abscess on the bandage and insert your finger into that incision; and if you have found and secured it with the bandage, then extract it quickly and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the hernia, then take it with a hook; and cut off its excess parts.
But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then circle that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and insert into them two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, causing them to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place remain open until the spread flesh can fall off by itself; or cut that part when it is thinned out and has fallen off, and then heal it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or fluid in it, then you should draw out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or fluid that you find in it, and then heal it with water that promotes healing and strengthens the area.
Sure, I'll translate the text line by line into English. Please provide the next part of the text after "Capitol .liii.
Chapter 53. About the treatment of crabs (lice).
We have said in the division about the species of crabs (lice) and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is necessary to use iron in the treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also mentioned crabs born from mothers and the caution needed for their treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes crabs (lice) are in places where their eradication is possible, such as on the head or in the armpits and similarly in other parts of the body, and it is best to remove them all, especially when they are just starting out small.
But when they are old and large, it is not wise to approach them, for I have never seen anyone cured of that, nor have I seen or heard of any other who has reached such a state.
And the treatment for them is as follows: you should first purge the patient and administer black hellebore several times, and then bleed them if there is a clear indication of congestion.
Then prepare the patient with the appropriate preparation for the operation, and then proceed with the incision that is required; then scrape thoroughly from all sides with a good-quality spoon until no cause of its return remains. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it abruptly, but apply pressure to the area and cleanse the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument suitable for this purpose from among those available to you.
But if you encounter an obstruction of thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter forty-seven.
On the Treatment of Diabetics.
We have already mentioned in the classification the types of diabetes due to water and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medications.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of diabetes called althea, and it should not be treated with iron if it is the type known as tympanites or hypoglycemia, for this is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of diabetic known as tympanites with medicines and your treatment has not been successful, then consider that if the patient has already become debilitated, or suffers from another type of diabetes, such as coughing or abdominal pain similar to these, then be cautious not to treat him with iron, for there is cause for concern about this.
Certainly! Here is the translation of the given text into English:
The translation of the sentence into English is:
And then consider if the origin of dropsy is from the intestines, because in that case you should perform an incision near the navel for three times the length of the fingers, on the right side of the patient, over the pubic bone.
But if the cause of dropsy is a liver disorder, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three times the length of the fingers.
And if the cause is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wants it to be, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place quickly.
And then perforate with the instrument all the way through the intestine, and then introduce it into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the bladder, and you will scrape it out; if the amount is of a fingernail or close to it.
And then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty place, which is where the water is. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of this form: and it is similar to a fine silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, at the end of which is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is sharpened like a pen, as you see:
And on the topmost part of him is an armor, because when the instrument reaches the water, they immediately remove it from the instrument, thus evacuating a large quantity of water in that moment. For if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, it can cause the patient to die suddenly due to the loss of their vital spirit, or it can lead to quintan fever, which indicates an imminent death.
But evacuate only as much as the strength of the patient allows, according to what the disposition of the patient indicates regarding the strength of their pulse and their overall well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and draw out the water that causes it, because as soon as it is drawn up by the cord that holds the pipe which is placed on the top of the container, I advise you to pierce it in this manner.
Then repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and draw out a small quantity of water each time. Do this for several days, being cautious to ensure that only a little water remains.
But if you fear for the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it with a poultice of hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until he is cured.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the area of water removal, as I have described earlier in this text.
Chapter 50.
Concerning the treatment of infants whose urethral openings are not perforated.
Sometimes, one of the infants is born from his mother's womb with an unperforated head of the penis (or it is narrowly perforated and not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to cut with a needle as soon as he is born, using a very fine instrument in this manner:
And then place a thin lead pin through the opening and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
When he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then replace it afterwards.
And if you do not place the lead there, it is possible that the urine which comes to that place will not find an opening.
But the one with a narrow opening should be treated with a lead pin as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But those in which the opening is not in its proper place are called hypospadias, and the cause of this is that the one who was born with the opening at the end of the penis cannot urinate straight ahead, but must lift his penis upwards; and it is not a good thing for him, because the semen cannot reach the mother as it should be, and this is a very bad condition. etti
Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and stop the bleeding with something that can cauterize the wound, and care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter LVI.
Of the whitening that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of darkening, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This whitening occurs frequently in the penis and is prominent in the loose skin.
And of these, one is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, which means you should suspend it with fine linen and cut it until it is all removed; then place a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and then treat it with diaphanic ointment until it heals.
And if the whitening is malignant, of black color, then you should apply cautery near its origin and cause.
However, if the whitening is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part outside, then you should remove the whitening that is inside at the beginning until it is solid; and then you treat what is outside, because when you treat both the foreskin and the penis together, it is not certain that it will not recur.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then care for him with the other treatment until he is healthy.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
because the healing cautery is effective against two conditions at once, which are the flow of blood and the wound when it becomes corrupt.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin, so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy, and on whom circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), it is necessary that you should separate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.  (This passage seems to be referring to phimosis, a condition where the foreskin cannot be retracted over the glans, often due to scarring or inflammation.)
And if it is difficult to separate them precisely, then you should separate with a spatula some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin. And this is because the foreskin, being thin, is easily pierced by its own thinness slightly.
Based on the provided context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then it should be treated with six styptic applications until it is healed.
Chapter .57.
Of the cleansing of infants and the care of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for lust like other diseases; however, since it is of our operation and will, and especially in children, it is necessary to assign the best operation and the easiest way to preserve health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. The only reason is that we have acquired it by experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers to practice circumcision and cleansing with a razor and cloths; and they use bandaging with thread and incision with the nail.
And I have tried all these methods and did not find better cleansing with scissors, with bandaging with thread that in cleansing with the nail, because many times it escapes the cord above, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the lower tunic remains, and easily a new incision and pain is ensured. And with cleansing, which is done with alphacati, and is digital, which shoemakers use, the insertion of the end of the male member is not secured, because it easily enters into its hole.
But in the operation with a nail, be careful and avoid iron and do not let your operation be spoiled. And the baby's umbilical cord is short by nature, and it is often seen that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
But the cleansing that is done with scissors and bandages with thread, its goodness, practical experience has revealed to me, because the scissors have proportional insertion, for this reason as the sharpness above is so also the sharpness below; and therefore as you press your hand in a proportionate manner between the two sharp edges, and you cut according to a comparison in one time; and there is made a compression of the thread with the figure containing the penis cord from all sides, with which nothing goes wrong. ⟩⟩
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down as much as possible if he is one of those who understands a little, that you only tie the thread in his penis so that you leave him until the next day.
And then make that person happy in every way possible so that they can regain their consciousness. Then have that person sit between your hands and prepare themselves, without being upset; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any other of the tools.
Then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow air into it, and pull out until the head of the penis is visible, then clean that area of any filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is how it should be done:
The nails should be straight and not pointed, while the other ends should be sharp. The length of the two points should match the length of two equal-sized handles.
However, the mistake in modification is when you completely or partially remove the inner lining; you should leave it intact.
Therefore, you must extend it at the appropriate time with your fingernail in front of the affected area and cut it according to symmetry.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed under the affected area, then let it be until the swelling subsides, carefully scrape it off, and cut it according to your preparation.
And be careful with the tip of the tool, because that is not necessary.
And therefore treat it with something that will heal the wound from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cut too short and you follow the instructions above, that will not matter.
And take care of him with water until he is healed.
Chapter 58.  (Latin "capitulum" means chapter, and the number 58 is written as lviii in Roman numerals)
About the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed blood clot, or by an inflamed or swollen part, and it appears similar to those we have mentioned before regarding the ways of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned and a strong cause has been applied to the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: It should be made of silver and be very thin and concave, similar to a bird's quill, about one and a half palms long, with a narrow cannula at its tip.
The sentence seems to be describing a procedure for the drainage of urine. Here's my attempt at translating it line by line:
And make the patient lie on his side, and insert an olive oil and rosemary mixture into his bladder and penis.
And then carefully insert the catheter until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis back towards the navel; and then push the catheter into that area; and then push that into the bladder, and the patient should feel when it has reached an empty space, and this is not done in a specific order, but rather goes into the opening where there is resistance.
And then slowly pull out the catheter with a small piece of wool, because the urine will soak the wool.
Then remove it and continue the treatment with more urine, and use the catheter again, do not stop doing this until the bladder is completely emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
On the use of enema for the bladder with sponges and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe pain, and you want to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a sponge, and this is how it looks:
"Until the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed. "And there are three holes in it: two on one side, and the same number on the other side.
"At the beginning, it is a concave place where that which is removed is placed. This depends on the quantity that is thrown out, without addition, until some cause draws out the humidities with it, then it is drawn out. And when it is expelled long, according to how much clampcedra mixed with naphta is used in sea battles.
"Therefore, when you want to prohibit humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the liquid that is expelled from the aforementioned parts, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
"Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the penis as we have mentioned in the surgery; then expel the humidity with it, because that humidity will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
"The shape of the subtle cristery with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And if it is made of silver or lead, whose tip should resemble a small feather, and afterwards you can introduce it into the wound.
And then take a pig's bladder, and place the liquid you wish to congeal inside it. Then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that liquid over the fire.
And then insert the end of the congealer into the bladder.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the liquid, and squeeze it strongly until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a container of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it through its entire circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are sewn together; and then add the circle in such a way that it is added tightly, because you place inside it one of the liquids, oils and waters.
And then you tie it to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and press with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
"Capitol" in this context likely refers to a chapter or section number. The Roman numeral "lx." stands for 60. So, the translation would be:
De extracción de piedras.
Here is the translation of your text:
"And we hold the stone on which we perform the operation with our hand, and cut.
"And the stone generated in the bladder is precisely that which is placed in the bladder.
"And I am now explaining this clearly and concisely.
"So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly occurs in children; and one of its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient feels pain in their penis, and often has to urinate frequently; and with this, the anus is closed with many of these.
"And healing for children afflicted by this is successful until they reach fourteen years of age; but it is difficult to cure in the elderly. "However, in young people it is easier because it is common among them.
"And of that [condition] from which the stone is larger, the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is the opposite.
"So when we come to the cure of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with the Christ's sign, which extracts all the fissure that is in his intestines; for this fissure sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone because of its inquisition.
"And then take the patient by their feet and rotate them back and forth to make the stone descend into the bladder or move from its place sometimes.
"And then make that cut between your prepared hands and let the patient's things fall down, so that the whole bladder can be made to decline towards the lower parts.
"And then search for it and all of it, removing it entirely from within.
"So if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut over it with a section [instrument].
"And if you do not succeed in removing all of it with your touch, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil, or the little finger if the patient is a young adult, and insert it into their rectum. "And search for the stone within until you find it under your finger. "And turn it little by little so that it enters into the neck of the bladder.
"And then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the lower parts near the place where you made the incision.
"And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the patient's legs upward with their right hand, while pulling downward with their left hand on the cord below the genitals, near the place of incision.
And now interpose a small spatula, the shape of which is as follows: And make an incision in that area which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not exactly in the middle, but rather nearer to the left side of the pelvis; let the incision be on that stone, and your finger should be in the rectum, and the incision should be transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to the size of the stone as far as possible, but no larger, because if you press too hard with your finger that is in the rectum, the stone will come out without difficulty.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their removal difficult because of this.
And such a stone, resembling a bean in appearance, is round, and its removal is easy to perform.
Therefore, if it is the kind of stone that has angles and edges, adjust it [the forceps] in the cleft.
And if it is not thus removed, then you must invent for it, or apply to it a suitable instrument, the tip of which should be like a file with which you scrape over the stone, and do not leave it; or interpose under the stone a thin, curved instrument.
Based on the context and the pattern of the text provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
If the stone is more than one, at first you should press your hand on the opening of the bladder and then cut into it; after that, push a little water in as well. Similarly, act if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorant to cut into it with a large incision, because you cause the patient one of two outcomes: either they die or they endure continuous dripping of urine, due to the fact that the area is not fully healed.
However, induce the expulsion of it until it is removed, or use forceps in the incision to extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with dressings of aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it tightly. And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and cold water, on it, so that the abscess may be diminished more cautiously.
Then lay the patient on their back and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a lot of oil, and then treat it with a daily application of diaphanous ointment and with diabolicum ointment until it is healed.
The provided text is written in Occitan, an old Romance language that was widely spoken in southern France and parts of Italy during the medieval period. Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and oppose it with any suitable remedy until the patient is healed.
And in all hours of treatment, you should lay both cushions and adjust the medications that have been placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it is fixed within it, and retention of urine is forbidden, then treat that with water that I recommend earlier to avoid dryness, because excessive use of this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experimented with this, and it is that you should take a needle made of iron wire, the shape of which is like this:
of a triangular tip, sharp, and fixed in a handle.
And then take a thread, tie the bladder with it below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, easily piercing until the needle reaches that stone. And slowly rotate the needle with your hand in that stone until you make the hole large enough for it to pass through completely; because the urine will be released immediately.
And then press your hand against the part of the bladder stone that has exited the urethra, because it is stuck and blocked by urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if for some reason you cannot perform this treatment, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it. And then cut through the stone in that urethra between the two ligatures. And then extract it. Then untie the bandage and cleanse the coagulated blood that has formed on the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie thread below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread above, for when the thread is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound. ię
And for this reason it is necessary that when you tie the thread above, you lift the chain to the parts above, or return your compliment as the case may be, and cover the wound in this way as we have said.
Chapter 61
On the Extraction of Stones from Women
This phrase translates to: "Stone in women is rarely generated." In medieval medical contexts, "stone" often referred to gallstones or kidney stones, so this line likely means that such conditions are uncommon among women.
"However, if stones appear in some of them, then its cure is difficult and it is forbidden by many methods." This passage suggests that while stones are rare in women, treating them is challenging and subject to various restrictions or prohibitions.
"One of the reasons is that the woman is very often a virgin." This line implies that one reason why treating stones in women is difficult is because they are frequently virgins, which may add to the complexity of their medical care or treatment options.
"And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who is well-educated and who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste or one of the women without husbands." This sentence indicates another challenge in treating women with stones: finding a knowledgeable woman who is willing to seek medical help, especially if she is unmarried or considered chaste.
"The third reason is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand." This sentence suggests that there is a lack of skilled female practitioners who can perform manual medical procedures on other women.
"And the fourth reason is that the location of the incision for removing stones in women is far from the stone itself, which requires a deep incision, and this is feared." This passage explains another difficulty in treating stones in women: the incision necessary to remove them is distant from the stone's location, requiring deeper cuts and causing fear or concern. ️
"However, if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a female doctor who is well-educated, and such women are rarely found." This sentence emphasizes the difficulty in finding a skilled female practitioner when treating stones in women becomes necessary.
If you lack that (skill/knowledge), then seek a midwife who is skilled and experienced in women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, present her and command her to do everything you order from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is a virgin, then she should insert her finger into the vulva and seek the stone.
Therefore, if she finds it, she should cut it off with her finger, then command her to scratch on it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and press it firmly.
Therefore, if she finds it, then gradually draw it out from the opening of the bladder to the external parts with the same caution until it reaches the level of the hip.
And immediately scratch on that position at the top of the vagina up to the level of the hip, wherever it may be, and keep the stone in that place, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting it off under it.
And the section should be small at first; then introduce the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount you know will make the stone pass through it.
And know that the types of stones are many: for they can be small and large, round and sharp, long and round, and have ridges.
Therefore, you should know the types of stones from this: indicate what you want to say about what you mean.
And if you see a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the area and let it sit for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure you have prepared with you the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it firmly with cloths and stricture, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, for otherwise the patient will die quickly. And then cure the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days and the spot is swollen, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
On the incision of hernia
A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the white bag, which is below the cord of the testicles containing the egg, and it is called a bag.
And sometimes it is in the proper peritoneum which nature has prepared for him in the departure of the egg, until another egg arrives; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white bag that we mentioned, and it is not just that, but later.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that happens in the testicles, so that this material flows into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors, for its color is either yellowish, or blood-red, or red, or black and foul, or it is watery white, and the latter is the most common.
This sentence appears to describe signs or symptoms of a condition related to water accumulation in the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And if the moisture is in the proper layer of fat, then the abscess will be round with an opening, and by this one estimates that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white sack, then leave the treatment to God (i.e., let nature take its course).
And when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with a clean cloth; and judge what is inside according to what appears on the outside of the cloth.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with iron, it is necessary that we order the patient to be bloodletted if it is possible for you, and frequently empty his body.
And then have him lie on his back over some high support, and place beneath him clean cloths.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, extending his wand to one of the two sides at the cord of the testicles and the opening of the anus.
And then take a spatula broad and thin, and carefully cut the cord of the testicles from the middle along its length up to the penis.
And let the section be made according to correct practice, at an equal distance from the line that divides the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane.
And peel away that [area], and observe, and be careful not to penetrate it; and use the instrument with which you are peeling, carefully, as thinly and delicately as possible according to your ability.
Then pierce the membrane full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the membrane towards the parts above; and do not touch the cord that reaches the genitals, and incise the membrane in whatever way is possible for you. And incise it entirely or in pieces, and especially its thin part, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the instrument proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then after you have completed the section of the membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to tie off the vessels that are on the suspenders, and extract the egg, and then cure it with the water that we have mentioned.
But if the water is divided into two parts at once, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, cut that part just as you did in the other one; and if it seems to be one operation, then do it.
And then you clean the blood, and introduce into the incisions wool soaked in oil or refined oil; and place outside another wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the navel of the belly. Place cloths and pillows on top, and tie them securely with a bandage according to this form:
And then take two cloths and soak them with wool according to this appearance; and make the ends with which you press firmly with cotton or wet wool, and attach them securely in the groin area of the trousers, and one end takes from the buttocks into the back, and the second takes at the place of the penis, and two ends underneath on two cushions, and two other ends on two ankles, and all the binding should be adjusted in the groin area of the trousers.
Based on the pattern of the previous translation and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating this sentence: And it is similar to Greek letters.
Then pierce with that instrument and ensure it is ignited until all the moisture has been expelled.
Then extend the instrument with a hook, and excoriate with a hook, and excoriate with a fine ignited cautery; and incise that according to what is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and be careful that the flame does not touch the bone.
And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding than one performed with a scalpel.
But if during the operation an abscess appears at the time of incision or cauterization, or there is bleeding, then you must treat whatever difficulty arises for you in this way, with the appropriate care as has been said.
But if the patient is timid and does not wish for a second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation as we recommend here; it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that that hernia is aquous.
Then you must have the patient sit on a high stool, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a lancet, and hold the perforation according to the length of the body.
"And let it be opened widely so that all the water flows out.
And then place a cloth on top of that and press it, so that the remaining water drains out. And then take care of that until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the draining of water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is not done except for this reason, because the white skin around the opening of the wound resists and prevents the outflow of water. Therefore, it is necessary that you insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy patients, as described above; or place a small cup over the wound in the opening.
And know that the water will return and may be retained for almost six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will thus spend his days [in this condition].
Chapter LXIII
On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment
Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is danger of loss in major cases; therefore I have seen its removal and being saved by this method.
And I am remembering the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that an abscess is born in the bodies of which the genitals are constricted, and this happens for several reasons: either due to acute bitter superfluity, which is infused into the genitals, or due to blunt trauma.
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
And if the abscess becomes stone-like, its color will be dark, and there will be no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation in such a way that its memory is already perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But what is caused by inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary for that to be touched.
However, that which is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from it by any means due to pressure with the fingers.
And it is possible that incision be made on this type and on other tissues; and this is what you should do: cut the skin of the genitals, then spread the membrane over the parts above, and extract that which is in the scrotum, and release the suspensory ligaments from the vessels, and tie them off, and cut the suspensory ligaments after you have released them from all parts of the testicles. ✓
If the egg is already set with those meats, then it is necessary that you remove the egg and introduce that.
If there is an adhesion between some part of the intestine or between what is inside the abdomen, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and introduce a round probe.
But if there is a tumor in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you introduce everything that is of it, and remove the egg as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .64.
Of the treatment of a hernia caused by wind.
Wind is an abscess wrapped in a membrane similar to bladder with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is necessary to beware of that which was mentioned previously.
However, we must say operation on it according to what the first ones did.
Here's the line-by-line translation of your provided sentence:
And then make an incision with a sharp, narrow blade through the right of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
And then scrape clean all the places just as we told you in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
And then place in them a needle with a double thread, and tie it first at the front of the places where the vessels are located, and then tie it again at their back. And then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then treat the wound with the same treatment used for other wounds in which you want healing to be induced so that the vessels do not close too soon, because this is not harmful.
However, if the vessels are all cut, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or to sew up the testicles with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the vessels and that they are not swollen, or so that they are not joined with them.
It seems like there might be some confusion or missing information in your request. The text you provided appears to be a title or section heading rather than a full sentence with content that can be translated line by line into English. Could you please provide the next part of the treatise for me to translate?
"On the care of intestinal hernias.
"This hernia occurs due to a cut that extends on the abdomen from the sides of the navel, causing some intestines to protrude through this opening.
"This rupture is either of the navel or of its extension, and these two types occur due to various causes: blow, fall, loud noise, lifting a heavy object, or similar events.
"The sign of this, when it is an extension of the navel, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, not suddenly, and is an abscess that forms inside due to the navel pressing on the intestine.
"The sign of this is when it is due to a cut in the navel, for at first it causes a sudden and severe pain; and it appears as a swelling under the skin, different from before, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, with its body appearing outside the navel.
And sometimes the intestine is accompanied by a piece of cloth, and this type of hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes a tear occurs in the intestine, which is then retained there, and this is very harmful to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, caution is required because it is necessary to avoid cutting into that area.
And the manner of operating on this is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inside parts of its cavity if it obeys its retraction, and then turn them onto their side between your hands, and lift up their legs.
And then stretch the spermatic cord, which is the cord of the testicles, towards the top, and cut through the entire length of the cord of the testicles; and then place two needles in the lips of the incision according to what you require to open the incision with them.
And if the incision, according to its quantity, allows it to be made without difficulty.
And then carefully remove those sacks which are below the cord of the testicles, until you discover the white hard sac from each side.
Then insert your finger into the space where the testicle is, between the white sac which is below the cord of the egg, and between the second sac, and dissolve with that adhesion which is in the rear part of the egg.
Then take the cord of the testicles in both hands, and with that draw out the white sac onto your left hand, and lift the egg with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the egg upward, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with complete solution.
And carefully search with your fingers to ensure that there is no part of the intestine wrapped in the hard white sac. But if you find any part of it, then peel it away towards the belly below.
And immediately cut in the place below the cord of the testicles, so that blood and pus may flow from it, as we have recommended in what we have said.
And immediately apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white end is cauterized, which we said near the cutting of the testicle to prevent blood flow, because many times it happens this way) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if the fall of it is delayed, then dip it in hot water and place it on top until it falls off as we have said.
And immediately treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
It seems like there's a typo or formatting issue in your message. Could you please provide the text that needs to be translated?
Of wind-borne hernias.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been daring enough to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done in this way, as we have recounted in the hernia that occurs with violence; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that [hernia] with gentleness; and then dry in the middle of the area around the abscess with water that opens that [area], until the vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the displacement that occurs in the anus.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anus as we have said, and it protrudes from the area.
And do not give the genitals any reason for the intestines [to protrude]; and if they do, that is little; and it returns to normal in all hours.  (This sentence seems to have a metaphorical or humorous tone.)
The text appears to be discussing a medical condition involving the intestines or bowels and their relationship with a specific part of the body called "ciphac" (possibly related to the Latin word "cyphus," meaning hump). Here's a line-by-line translation:
And the treatment of him is with a pointed cautery as described in his narrative.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the affected area of the bursting abscesses with a section according to the width of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth under the strap until it is revealed.
And then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the patient's belly.
And then sew together the two prominent parts at the end of the cloth, adjusting one to the other with stitches.
And then remove the end of the reed, and do not cut all of the cloth, nor extend the hollow, nor any other cause as I will tell you in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat it with the same treatment as for wounds, and when you have cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the cloth is contracted and does not fit the prominence of the rupture.
A pointed cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
It looks like you provided "Capitol .lxviii." but did not include the actual text to be translated. If you could provide the full sentence or paragraph from the medieval medical treatise, I would be happy to help translate it into English line by line.
Sure, let's translate that step by step:
"Many times the scrotum of some men is softened because the tissues between them are softened, and it is believed that this is true for him.
"Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating him to make the patient lie according to his disposition, and cut off all of the softened scrotum above the natural scrotum; and then he should join the two lips with stitches.
"And if you wish, in the beginning cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
"And then cut between the stitches, and then care for the other wounds until he is healed and the threads fall out.
"Chapter 69.
"On Castration.
"You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but it has been related to me, and I remember it in this book; the remembrance of it is necessary only for two reasons: one is so that a doctor may have knowledge of it when questioned about it, so that he may know how to care for those on whom it occurs. The other reason is that we often have need of castrating other animals for our benefit, such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with a dry method.
But in that which is performed by tearing, the method of the operation is to have the beast cease breathing in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down. Then take those with your hand until they are completely resolved and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration performed by cutting and dry method, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut over each testicle with one incision until you have processed both testicles.
Then cut those parts that you will have skinned. And do not leave any scab on them, except the subtle one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by tearing, for tearing leaves very little scab of the testicles so that the beast desires to mate.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70
Of the treatment for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a figure like that of a woman's pubis appears in the space between the testicles, in which there are hairs.
And sometimes urine flows from that place, which is located in the space between the testicles.
But in women, it is of one kind: and that is when the woman's vulva is like two men's testicles, a little smaller at the outer edge just like the foreskin of a man and with two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you first remove those attached tissues until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the remedies for other diseases.
And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for him.
Chapter 21
Of swelling and prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lentigo, which is a common condition related to natural causes, occurs until it becomes excessive and requires treatment; in some cases, it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as it does in men and is transmitted during intercourse.
Therefore, you must remove the excess of lentigo with your hand or with oil and vinegar.
And do not end with vinegar, especially on the face, to prevent blood flow.
Then treat it with remedies for skin diseases until it is healed.
However, flesh born is flesh that grows in the uterus of the mother until it fills her (and for this reason some call it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must treat it like we treat lentigo, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .72
About the treatment of alopecia.
Alopecia is when the woman's vagina is not perforated, or the opening is too small.  (Note: The term "alratica" and the description given here do not correspond to the modern understanding of alopecia, which is hair loss.) And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is the illness that has preceded it, and this is caused either by flesh not properly joined or by a subtle or thick splinter.
And this occurs either in the womb of the mother, or in the ribs of the child, or in the upper part of the body, or in the lower part. You should prohibit cutting, penetration, and pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
The recognition of this is done by the examination of the midwife, if the opening is apparent, immediately; but if it is not apparent, then you should search for it with your fingers or with a ray [of light].
But if the opening is due to a thin splinter and it is close to the two lips, then you cut and remove it.
And place over the two lips a powder of rose petals, and immediately after that place your index fingers on both sides together.
And the woman should lie on her back with her hips spread, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin splinter is broken and the opening is opened.
And immediately take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and go with a man for the day so that the torn flesh is not healed.
"But if the tumor is large and thick, then it is necessary for you to cut it with a spatula of lead or with a leaf of myrtle.
"But if the swelling is due to an infection, then suspend it with hooks, and cut it open.
"And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without cauterization, such as aloes, dragon's blood, and glasswort, mixed with egg white.
"And then administer a wide lead probe so that the wound is not prematurely healed.
"And keep it there for several days, and apply lard to it.
"And then treat it with the other healing method until it is healed.
"And sometimes this happens during childbirth, and then you should cut according to this method. "But if it is due to a hardened abscess, then for the hardened abscess that is in the womb, do not make an incision in any way.
"Chapter 73.
"About the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail, and red buttocks that occur in women's genitals.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and I will say the same about those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hernias, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases, treatment should not be done with iron.
But those that are in the opening of the mother and are felt by sensation, those are the ones that can be cured.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold room and then extend her with forceps or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razors.
And then you should sprinkle over them one of the powdered bloodless incisives without pain, such as henbane and similar ones.
And then you should wrap her feet for one hour, and then place her in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels, and similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of the patient.
And if the blood is severed, it's good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses and to the breasts without scarification.
Then take wool and soak it in either celery juice, or honeysuckle juice, or rosemary juice with white wine and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter .74.
On the perforation of the eardrum occurring in a woman.
Many types of swellings occur in women, such as crabs, aphthous ulcers, ulcers, piles, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, gout, and other swellings. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of them, and their signs, and their treatments in the section on women.
And it is fitting that I should say in this treatise on the abscess that occurs in a woman when it is of the type that does not heal easily, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line into English:
And then the midwife should follow the right and left side of the woman, with the instrument that is used to open the mother's orifice, whose shape will be described shortly.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it with the ray (or handle) on the perineum of the woman, and make sure that only as much of the instrument enters the woman as the length of her perineum. But if the instrument is longer than the perineum of the woman, then you should place pillows on the surface of her perineum to prevent any part of the instrument from entering her perineum.
And it is necessary that you place the edge of the instrument on the left side, and that the one administering it holds the instrument and turns the edge until the mother's orifice is opened.
And when the protrusion appears and is touched by hand and is smooth and moist, then you should dry that place with a broad paddle.
And when the pus has been evacuated, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which should have some styptic properties; and apply pressure to the opening at the woman's perineum.
And place outside the mother and on the pillow clean wool dipped in water in which there are mallows.
And let it be treated for approximately two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed together with water and honey until it is crystallized, and then with water in which there is ground lily or long aristolochia, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, and care for it instead with water as we said above in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives how to treat pregnant women when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman pushing from below and she wants to smell the air, and because of this she is relieved from what is above her during childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus. Then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the baby's head emerging first, and the second comes with it, either suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
When you see those signs, then it is necessary to press the stomach so that the embryo descends gently, because when it comes over its head, they give it the second blow, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with a good cleaning.
But that which happens in this case is unnatural and not to be praised, because when the embryo has come out of its feet and the body comes out before its head and its feet, and one hand comes out at the foot or at the head, or the head and the hand come out together with the stomach, it is easily turned over on its neck, and it resembles the figures of the unpraiseworthy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of these, and what intelligence is in them, so that it may be known by this and may have been established on this.
When the fetus has come out of its head by natural weakness, and that is very strong on the woman and it is difficult for her to give birth, and sometimes the strength of the woman is already weakened, then do this thing: have women hold her, and evaporate the head of the child with hot fennel seed and moist oil.
And immediately insert the catheter between its said small blade and slit, or cut it with its nail until you find what is within it in moisture. And press on the woman's belly until the child descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman must be anointed with a mixture of ptilium and fenugreek seeds with vinegar.
And immediately command her to lie down and anoint her, so that she is compressed and make her sneeze forcefully; and hold her mouth and nose closed for one hour, because the child will be expelled quickly afterwards.
And if both hands of the child have already been expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with gentleness. But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her legs up, and immediately turn the chair over on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the limbs of the child or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will be expelled.
When the child excretes onto its feet, then you should immediately wipe them off, and then turn the child over, and then wrap it up, and then take one of its legs and stretch it out little by little.
However, when it has excreted into its clothes, then you should command the child to express itself, and make it sneeze with conditions, because otherwise it will be constipated if God wills it.
And if it is not relieved by the water that we have recommended, then you should return the child little by little until you place it according to its natural position, because then it will be relieved with a light excretion.
And if it is not helped by all the water that we have recommended, then take of powdered aloe and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and then anoint with this water the concavity of the woman's vulva, as low down on his belly as possible. And then make it sip warm water until it reaches the hypochondrium (the area below the diaphragm and above the navel).
And when you see that the parts of his body are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and apply it to him. And when you apply sublimation (or smoke treatment) for an hour, then you make the patient lie down on a stool, and then make them sneeze and clear their mouth, and lift them up, and press the lower part of their abdomen with light compression, because this will quickly expel the wind.
It seems that you're working with a text that is influenced by medieval medical treatises written in languages related to Latin and Romance languages like Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the given sentence line by line: "If you succeed in reducing the hand of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk.
"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike her sides vigorously with a pillow or cushion filled with moss.
"And if the birth has occurred, then make her sit on a chair, and proceed to reduce the hand, and bring the child back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push until it is expelled.
"Then place the child on his mother's lap, with his hands outstretched and his face against her back. "Have the midwife hold the child's hand and then gently roll him over, little by little, to make it easier for him.
"And when he is turned and has been brought out, then place on his navel that which we have prepared with oil and moss.
"And then command her to vomit little by little, and when you have done that, make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over her right side, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze forcibly. "Exitus foetus praeparati super latus" means "The exit of the prepared fetus onto the side." In this context, it refers to a fetus being positioned for delivery with its shoulder or side presenting first.
"When the mother experiences horror in this manner, consider this: then you should incise the second uterus with your nail until it is evacuated of its moisture.
And if the swelling is suspended on the face or neck of the patient, then cut it at the navel, so that it is not constricted and does not die.
And then push the swelling towards the inner parts until you place it in its proper location, and send the woman to fetch some warm compresses, and the servant should apply them gently, if God wills it.
Twin birth or multiple fetuses. Know that twin babies are often born prematurely, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is rare and unfortunate. However, this can happen due to natural causes, not unnatural ones.
And as for those (twins), whether they are multiples or not, a second one, and if they are separated by the navel, distinguish between them based on the ligament in each of their navels. Sometimes they are born as if they were a single fetus by natural birth, and sometimes they are born by a birth that is unimaginable, as we have mentioned.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and you reach the point where we mentioned concerning unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skillful and performs this with ease and subtlety, and slowly, and let her be inventive according to every figure as it is prepared by the intellect for health.
And remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is miscarried.
Sometimes a womb can form one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or even ten (fetuses), and it has already been verified that one woman miscarried six, while another miscarried ten all formed, which was caused by the measurements of the glorious sages.
And all this should be known to the midwife because she quickly recognizes that appearance, and therefore she should proceed with it accordingly.
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the section on treatment, and it has not yet come out, then you will be forced to use manual operation. Therefore, you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not suffer from any of the conditions that put her at risk.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised up.
Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with a mixture of oils, honey, and a blend of herbs including althea, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and balms, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search for the place where the fingertips will rest on the baby.
And in this case: then consider if the baby is ready to be born by breech delivery, and then place your fingers on its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under the chin, or on the sternum, or near the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
But if the delivery is by the feet first, then in the pubic region or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you hold the fingers with your right hand, and place the curve of them in that place which is between the teeth of the left hand, and gently insert the hand, until the baby reaches the pelvis.
And then place and position another finger, or a third if necessary, in order to create equal traction and not just extension along its line.
Based on the given context and similarities with Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
And it is necessary that the area between them be softened; and if any part of him is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them, turning with what is retained.
So if the part of the child is forgotten (i.e., not yet delivered), then the fingers should be changed in that place where it is more hot; and do this until the entire child is delivered.
But if the hand is protruding before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its swelling, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then carefully pull it out until it is completely delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
And thus you should do for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the child is large, or if there is swelling during delivery, or if there is water in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thin spatula and split open the skull and draw out the water, or discover it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter following this one.
And similarly act if the injury is serious by nature: then it is necessary to cut off that part with a saw or to take it away as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should make an incision until the fluid that is in the feet is released.
But if it is not complicated, nor does it respond to swelling, then you should immediately cut the head as much as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the sides of the abdomen are swollen or there is an excess of fluid, then you should pierce it until the fluid drains out.
But if the injury is on his feet, then his pull is light and his direction towards the mother's vagina is gentle.
But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary that you extract that part with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and that you cut open the abdomen and feet until the fluid drains out of them.
But if the other members are missing and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is open, then she should insert her hand into the hollow of the air (public area), and search for the head with it, and draw it towards the mentioned (openings) into the mother's vagina, and afterwards insert one or two fingers into him, and pull him out with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurs on the person, then it is necessary not to cause the patient discomfort; rather, it is necessary first to administer an infusion of moist fats. And apply poultices; and follow up with the patient using waters that soften and moisten.
And if the abscess is on the side of the body, then if it is possible, let it be punctured: and administer the water that we have said for a live abscess.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed.
And care must be taken that no cause remains inside the wound.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the water that we have said for the treatment of abscesses that occur on the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then place in stiptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and then over that fire another pregnancy, and then the other fetus is also dead. It happened to her that she had a long-lasting abscess in her navel; and it became so inflamed that the skin burst open, and she began to pass her limbs.
And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed strong adhesive plasters on him for some reasons, and an [unspecified] bone came out of him, and after a few days, another bone came out; and I was greatly amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
Then I thought that these were bones from the dead child (or fetus).
Therefore I examined the wound, and extracted many bones from him, the woman being in her thousandth month of pregnancy. And she had lived in this manner for a long time, until a small arm came out of him.
And I did not consider this to be strange, but rather because in this there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor does with his hand to administer care.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the child (or fetus).
The shape of the forceps used to open the mother:
This is the shape of the strengthener into which the leaves are inserted, and when inserted, there are two forceps at each end of the two feet. Sure, here's my attempt at translating that line:
Certainly! Here's a translation of the provided text into English:
Based on the provided context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ebony wood or beechwood according to the likeness of forceps. However, at its end there are two additions like this, and the length of each of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus with these [instruments], then you make the woman lie down on her back with her legs hanging, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount you want of the lip of the uterus's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo that the ancients called:
A form of pushing with which the child is pushed out.
A form of pressing with which the head is flattened
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like this. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this, with teeth like saw teeth with which one cuts and flattens. Certainly! Let's break down this sentence step by step:
This translates to:
The text seems to be discussing a specific form or method that involves two needles or spines. Here's a possible translation of the line:
The shape of a spatula with two ends used to cut the head.
The form of two wide spatulas.
All these instruments are practiced, and the more species of them are multiplied and prepared by craftsmen, the easier it is for their operation and the more useful they are for people due to their quantity.
And do not lack those instruments wherever you go, because the need for them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the afterbirth (placenta).
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you should order the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with force, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out this way, good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce through it a hole, and place in that burning herbs at the mother's mouth, such as calament and rue and anise and camomile and scordium arabic and cassia wood and santolina. "All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
"Then place a reed tube in the mouth of the patient, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient.
"Then make them sneeze as we said, and the second night it will be expelled quickly.
"But if this treatment persists and is not effective, then you should instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or mallow lotion, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second child. Once found, gently pull it out little by little. But if it is connected to the uterus of the patient, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and once you find the second child, extract it slowly, following its natural path so that the patient does not suffer from intense cramping. "Beforehand, it is necessary to permit the sides of the chest to expand easily.
And if the mother's mouth is closed, we have already begun the treatment with suction and with a medicine made from oil and herbs.
But if it is not cured with all the reasons we have mentioned, then be careful not to repeat this process of extraction, but rather let what has been removed from him go to the mouth of the mother, and then cauterize that area with an ointment and a compound medicine; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and then dissolve and be forgotten.
But when it rots, it raises a very bad smell in the head and in the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, at that point, it is necessary to administer substances with a pleasant scent and appropriate for this purpose.
But some of the ancients have already tried using fumigation with dried grapes and figs.
The method by which a woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and the second trimester:
It should be made of glass or iron.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina, while the wider end is held over the fire, and the smoke should be directed towards the coals of the fire.
And have that (fire/heat) applied until that (smoke/vapor) is completely consumed, and then apply another (one).
Of the treatment of an infant's unperforated anus.
Many infants are born with their anuses not yet pierced, which is a delicate and hidden matter. Therefore, it falls to the midwife to pierce this secret place with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp stick, and be careful not to touch the membrane (or perineal tissue).
And then place over it some wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may close up again, then insert a tube into the opening for many days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
And if the anus is closed due to the healing of a wound or abscess, then that healing must be cut open, and it should be treated afterwards as we have said for wounds and with lead (ointment).
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower parts, which are thick and large, occurring near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is either a fistula or hemorrhoids.
And when that node is old and the humidity is watery white or subtle pus, sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And those penetrating are known by that which exits from them due to outflow and flatulence; sometimes the patient uses this outflow, and it is easy for worms to exit from them as well.
And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip, and into the bone of the thigh.
And how a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating is known, is that you put your finger into the anus, and introduce a subtle tent of iron or silver into the fistula when it is not turbid.
But if there is turbidity in it, then introduce a subtle tent of lead or horse hair into it until you feel the tent or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all nor does any of the discharge proceed from it, whether it be worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and thus turn to its treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the opening of the penis, then its significance is the issuance of urine from there and a prohibition that the location be treated with medicine until it is healed.
But if it penetrates into the hip joint or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that the tentacles enter here if they are not stuck in the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the affected part; and that from it there will always be pus; and that no medicine will work for it, nor will it be healed with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for the foolish doctors who are fixed upon them.
But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recount to you, and this I have already proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands with his back turned to you and raises his legs towards him, so that his hips are inclined towards his belly, and then interpose a lead probe, or iron if there is constriction in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe enters.
And if that makes the patient uncomfortable around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger that the vein has already opened by itself and is exposed, or if you feel between your finger and it a slight pain, then know for certain that it has penetrated; and then do not work on it, because there is no cure there, as we have said.
But some say that it heals late in some men.
And for the treatment by which help is hoped for him, it is that you take a subtle cautery fire according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those carnal tissues resembling a quill are completely adjusted.
And then cure that with gauze wrapped in bandages until all the adjusted tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and healing. If it is healed, well and good; otherwise, it will not heal at any time by another treatment.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then cleanse those fistulous flesh parts which resemble the hollow reed of a bird, and let nothing of them remain.
But if blood flows between you and your operation when you cut into those flesh parts, then use milk or an instrument with acute medicine to cauterize it with fire or medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it is the adhesion of the flesh and the drying out of moisture.
Then wrap that [wound] with clean rags or linen until the area becomes warm, and then treat the wound with ointment to promote healing and strengthening of the flesh.
And these medicines have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is considered healed and you should not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already extends into the rectum and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And therefore, if you find that the opening is closed or covered with membrane or flesh and it is near the rectum, then do not operate on it, but rather treat it through faith and hope.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it goes along the back of the buttock over the surface of the body with the string and along the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated probe, which looks like this:
and wrap the probe with five threads or around it, and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
However, if it penetrates deeply into the edge of the anus, then you should extract the thread from that opening by inserting your finger into the anus; and draw out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it like this for a day or two. And when you see that the thread is deeply embedded in the flesh, tighten it well so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is tightly bound and closes up.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cured.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared, as long as it is very close to the skin, because you should not do this so that you don’t cut the scrotum; and then do it until it is healed.
Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence into English:
"About stitching hemorrhoids when blood flows from them.
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they appear like coals in the rectum, or they are accompanied by a fatty substance. "And they can be small or large; the blood that flows from them is either always present and one drop at a time, or in drops, and it can be outside the anus, or at its extremities.
"However, those that are outside the anus are of two types: one with little moisture, from which flows citron-colored water or a little blood continually; and they are according to the color of the body.
"And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and to press until the anus comes out and the hemorrhoids appear to you. "Then take hold of them and suspend with the fingernails that you have them with your nail, and then cut off their roots.
"But if the fingernails are not held by them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a thread or a wool string, and pull those out with the said things, and then cut them off and sprinkle on them some warm powders near the incision, so that they serve as cautery for those; or cauterize those as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization. And immediately care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the rectum does not obey an evacuation, then administer cathartics to the patient with a cathartic that contains a small amount of bitterness, and wash it with water from the colon so that it may gently obey the evacuation when the patient is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause is slight, and it is that you take them with your finger or that you take them with tongs, and insert them, and immediately care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
And he who has made an incision should administer suture in the following manner: take thread wrapped around and inserted into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the base of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and so longitudinally; and bind the hemorrhoid tightly with strong sutures, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
And do this for all (affected areas), and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess blood will flow out from that one.
Then place a clean cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the affected area, and place it on the wound, instructing the patient to rest. Then leave that (cloth) in place until it dries; and when it is dry, treat the area with ointment or another remedy until it heals.
And since they are old and not helped by this treatment, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become wet, and remove the crust of pus from their surface, which prevents them from healing; then treat them until they are healed.
Then you remove them with a sharp instrument, causing abundant bleeding and excoriation; then treat them until they are healed.
Know that alamermar is a fistula, and it is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs in all parts of the body, especially under the feet and in the joints, and from this pain you should know its location.
And then it is necessary to cut that which is around the nail, and hold it with tweezers or pliers, and remove it from its root; then cure that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the second part as was previously described in this chapter.
But warts are small, rough, round projections on the surface of the body, and they are often seen on the hands of children.
And its cure is to stretch it and cut it, or to tighten it with thread or hair so that it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small, feathery or rough projection on the surface of the body, usually appearing on the face, and when the cold attacks it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it spreads around the body.
And its cure is to take a reed from a swan's feather or a vulture's feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole until the circle of the reed contains all of its parts; then roll your hand with the reed until you cut that which is around the mole, and place it on the face of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
If you wish, perform this with an iron or bronze needle according to this method:
If the opening above the needle is fine and not piercing, wrap it so that the sensation of touch on the finger is dulled and the rotation is slowed.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery for atheyl.
About the shapes of the instruments that are used to give relief.
Sometimes relief is given with silver or copper, cast or hammered; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to those to whom they are administered, because the one that is administered in the care of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are rough or painful, their reliefs should be small.
The shape of a large and few reliefs:
The tip of the needle at the top, where the bag is attached, should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinction where the bag is tied like this:
And the lower end, which is inserted into the buttock, should be blunt (that is, not open), resembling a lion's tail, tapering to a point; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
And let there be a bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of wool of sheep are placed, and its size should be one palm (or hand's breadth).
And let it be pierced by fine needles in the same way that it is rolled up; and if the space between the needles is the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into those needles a strong thread of raw silk, which should be from these same threads, or wrap them around; and fasten the bag with it; and when the bag is placed in it, tie it tightly at the top of the cross between two ends with great pressure, and then bandage each needle: But the way to bandage it is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and make sure that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then let the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a stool or a bench underneath them; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the anus gently, and then let the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press it strongly until everything in the bandage is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bandage and let the patient raise their legs to the wall.
Based on the given context and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
Certainly! Let's break down and translate the sentence step by step:
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a very fine and thin probe, similar to those used for baptizing infants.
For the treatment of wounds.
I have already mentioned in the section on wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I will describe the treatment of wounds using both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to how they are made and the location on which they fall.
And the reasons why many times wounds are made are such as striking by stone, or cutting with a sword or knife, or piercing with a spear, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those other causes.
However, the wounds that are in specific locations of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those of other members.
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds so that you may use that reasoning and rule for other wounds as well.
And I will begin with the treatment of simple head wounds, because the memory of compound fractures will come at the beginning of the third chapter.  (In medieval medicine, "compound" referred to complex or severe wounds, not just open fractures as it does today.)
"Therefore, I say that when a simple blow to the head occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and if the artery has been cut only slightly but it is a severe wound and you fear the formation of an abscess on the patient, then you should act quickly and perform phlebotomy on the temporal artery immediately; do not delay this. Extract from him as much blood according to his strength, unless there is any other reason that prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little.
"And let the phlebotomy be done on the opposite side of the wounded part; and ensure that the patient avoids fullness, overeating, and heavy foods.
"But if any cause prohibits bloodletting, then the patient should be put on a lighter diet and avoid meat and wine.
"And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton dipped in plain oil or wine that has been made astringent.
"But if the formation of an abscess is certain, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and has not been exposed to air for too long, a small amount of the powder that I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment over it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by a blow and appears unnaturally deep, and its lips are not properly aligned, then align them with stitches as I will explain the method of stitching.
But if the wound is already exposed bone and there is no retention of it but only a slight suspensory ligament, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and instruct the patient to consume foods rich in: heads, fish, and similar items until healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is putrid and clean it out, and then treat it.
But if there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood may flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should look for the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light; so you should sprinkle this powder over them because it will solidify before the air changes them.
And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts calcined shell; all should be finely ground and sieved, and with it the wound should be filled, and a good bandage applied until it heals well over it.
Then strengthen it above with bandages and leave it alone, and do not remove the bandage until it is healed, because the medicine will not be effective unless it is completely healed.
And sometimes this alone acts as a precaution, when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood at hand.
And perform the same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and keep them closed, and these are fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then this powder is not intended for that, but rather you should treat them with the water we mentioned earlier, so that you place on them some digestive ointments, or you can place on them a paste of barley flour with water and honey until they develop pus; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens that there is a bone fracture, and it is small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
And I say the cure for skull fractures involves something called trephination.
Of neck wounds
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple head wound.
But if the nerves of the neck have been cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no need for a stitch but rather avoid treatment with something that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and iron (which are similar to them) because they irritate the nerves and contract that part. And do not place any pressure on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most important of all members.
And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and cleansed when washed with sweet water and other stones diminishing according to this method, and moist bandages.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
But if during the treatment an artery has already been cut and blood flow is present, then you should separate, dry, or bind the wound, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if you have already cut the tendons of the throat or all of them and managed to save the veins of the neck, then you should sew the lips of the wound with a thread over the cane of the throat and do not touch it; beforehand, clean the area and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent dressing, leaving it for several days; afterwards, treat it with ointments that have styptic and astringent properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already affected the bone, then you should drill into it, and if there are fragments of bone inside, remove all that you can; and what is not apparent to you, leave it until the wound heals by itself, and the infection is separated and the pain is alleviated.
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the remedy that will be mentioned later in this chapter.
"If it is a thrust by lance or dagger, and you measure its depth, then consider more if there is bleeding when the patient coughs; in this case, know that the wound is mortal.
"And if the wound is not deep and it is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should apply powder to it, and do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and causes the patient harm; rather, apply drawing ointment, and dress it two times a day.
"And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should place cotton over the wound opening so that it absorbs moisture from the humors; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the liquid inside is drained.
"But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasm, tremor, heart distress, or difficulty breathing occurs, and you notice the other good dispositions of the patient, then know that the wound is healed; and from then on, treat it with bandages and other care until it is fully healed.
"But if the patient's healing is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its own principles.
"And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been prepared for stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
"But if it has already affected the bone and there are some heavy pieces of flesh from the cut, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate. "But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can dry out, and their removal will be easier.
"And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
"Of the wounds of the abdomen.
"The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, small, or moderate.
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving the reduction of hernias or prolapses. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And therefore the best rupture is the middle one, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but there are two common sutures that are also suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
And the two other sutures are common to other wounds, but nevertheless they are more specific for the suturing of the abdomen.
And I will now describe each one to you with an explanation and description.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some intestine coming out of it, and it is difficult to reduce, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
And therefore, when it is so, then you should scrape it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth moistened only with warm water, or one taken in boiling water with cumin, pepper, cloves and other herbs to reduce the inflammation of the intestine.
And in some cases, it is beneficial to use an astringent, and it is better for the resolution of inflammation than water alone.
And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisturize the intestine with water in which althea and mallow have been boiled, because by this it is relieved of its discomfort with little effort.
But if the intestine of the patient cannot be relieved with this treatment, then cut the disruption a little with an instrument that is used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not excessive, so that there is no need to dry out or cause weakness.
As for the instrument, consider its shape:
One part of it should be sharp and curved, and the other part not sharp. The tip should be thin, but not as thin as a spatula; instead, it should be blunt at the end.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible over water, because it is better this way.
But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration always on this so that the side with the injury may be higher than the other.
And in this way, you must administer it for both large and small wounds.
And for small wounds, make sure that the one who administers it is between your feet, holding the wound completely with his hand and closing the lips of the wound; then discover whether there is any cause to apply another suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; then pass the thread through the end of the wound on the little finger, and tighten the thread, making sure not to put a knot in both ends of the cord. With two ends of the thread, place them under the parts within, until you make that part penetrate from that side; and after adding two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, you have made four stitches.
And then strengthen the double stitch around the edge of the wound, and sometimes both parts together, and then join the two lips of the wound for decent closure; and then lay the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in it, and then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this with needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be moderate in size between thickness and fineness, for fine needles slightly cut into the flesh; thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in both fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted into both ends of the skin too close together, so that the flesh is not slightly cut and the wound does not split before healing.
And do not extend the stitches too far, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then trim the ends of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping; and place on the stitches soft pads from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound is healed.
And these kinds of stitches with needles in any manner are more suitable for small wounds, because for the stitching of them only one or two needles or around those.
But the second stitch is more common: and it is that you apply the stitches to the four extremities, of the tendon and two extremities of the sinew, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around in both delicacy and thickness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that same part where it began, so that the thread may rise to the higher part of the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch in cloth which holds the clothes tightly together.
And place between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this stitch is known to men.
And with such a stitch I sewed the wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded by a sword, and the opening of the wound was more than one palm's width, and it was protruding around two palms of the intestine from the middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and the patient was cared for and recovered; and then he lived for many years after, continuing with his usual habits.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle, for I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I will describe two types of proper stitches according to the teaching of the Word.
And it is that you begin with the stitch of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
And thus when the needle penetrates the thread and you have made a loop, straighten it along the entire length of the body, leaving the end of the thread which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate again from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the middle.
And thus when you have made that penetration, then you make that same penetration again in the same extremity of the middle from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the thread which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
And have it penetrate with that, your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the cavity at the end of the observed part, which is within him, so that all of it enters.
And then begin from this side of the cavity, and with that [instrument] penetrate to the other side, and remove the needle from the thread which penetrated, and then reduce it into the same thread and bring the end of the cavity on this side to this end of the observed part; and remove that [thread] from the part nearest him.
And do this once and again, and do it one time close to another until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin stitch with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the cavity once from the end of the thread, and leave that other time until you have completed it.
But the second type of suture, which is called Galenic after him and for which he is praised, is that you sew it according to the semilunar stitch with which some doctors sew, so that they bring all the separated parts back to their natural place; and they apply one end of it and the end of the observed part to the other end of it, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Sure, let's break down and translate the given text:
And then turn each of those (parts), and make each one penetrate from the inside out towards the two extremities of the mentioned body, except for those that are on the opposite side.
And this manner of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that was mentioned before.
This is the account of Gaul
And some will say to you, the closure of the belly is done with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by introducing the needle from where it should be, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching method used for closing the chest equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then its closure is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of treating wounds is similar to that of other wounds.
Which is because when you find the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and close it and prepare it properly, then place over it a powder that promotes healing.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Based on the context and the pattern of the text provided, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if the patient feels pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which many times happens, then you should cauterize that area with six points of black stiptic, especially if the perforation has occurred in the intestine and there is a penetrating exit wound into its cavity.
And know that that which affects the large intestine is of lighter healing than that which affects the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "cecum" does not heal from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and the magnitude of those veins within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestinal lining, and you can find it fresh, reduce it in the same manner with which you reduce the intestines.
But if it has passed into the cavity and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that area with pitch on the affected spot, so that blood may flow out, because in the lining there are veins and arteries.
And immediately you will incise that which is other than the bandage, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the wound on you, so that the attraction of the patient towards you may be relieved. Then remove the cloth and issue the arm from the wound.
Recollection of wounds when they occur in the intestines.
When disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men. This is because I have seen one who had been wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become old and had formed a fistula, and from it came out excrement and wind.
Therefore, I pursued his cure already because he was not entirely cured, but I continued to treat him carefully until it healed and the place became consolidated.
And I, since I saw that the place was already consolidated, advised the patient to expect some bad event in his belly; and no one expected any bad event, but he remained in good spirits, eating and drinking, and then he entered a bath and exercised in his words.
And some experienced individuals have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied off in this manner: you take large-headed ants and then align the two lips of the wound and place one ant with its open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it bites onto them, strengthen its grip, and then cut off its head, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant near the first one, and continue doing this with ants, one after another, according to the entire length of the wound.
And then return that [the intestine with the attached ant heads] and sew up the wound; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause the patient any harm.
And it is also possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, since it is more like a needle; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and it should be very thin, and then tie the end of it with thread, wrapped, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine with it, and reduce it in the opening.
And this method of stitching with ants is only secondarily a way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then it is not a simple matter but rather a delicacy, and it will not heal completely.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess that becomes old and chronic, turns into an ulcer, does not heal and lasts for a long time without bursting, is universally called a fistula, and we call it hemorrhoids.
And a fistula in truth is a hard, tough, white nodule with which there is no pain, and the cavity within it is like the cavity of a bird's feather; and for this reason that ulcer is called "pene rizatz," that is, feather.  (Note: "Pene rizatz" seems to be a play on words with "pena de ausel" which means "feather of a bird.")
And it is in some people wet, which lasts for a long time; and very soon the moisture is absorbed within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is subtle.
Here is a line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical text into English:
"And it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is created through surgical intervention using the hand.
"And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are close to the main member and similar in appearance.
"Therefore, that among these fistulas which is according to this manner is of the most difficult cures and does not accept treatment, and dealing with it is laborious and ignorant.
"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places mentioned earlier, and you hope for its healing and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or lead, and if the fistula runs straight, investigate it with the probe.
"But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, for lead due to its lightness is easily guided and bent according to the twists.
And if the fistula has terrifying words, it is not your place to interpret over it with intention.
Therefore, irrigating the terrifying orifices with other orifices is necessary, for the humidity used to irrigate those will go to the others and flow from them.
And then inquire carefully, according to whatever method is possible for you to know whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula that has terrifying words and this is all within your strength, with your understanding, which you use to understand the patient, and the invention of the pain should be your pressure with the hand on the spot, and similar to the significations and the accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true steadfastness, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a salted place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry out the fistula as was said before in its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the orifice of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar substances, and cure it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
And do this with that some times until the sharp medicine dissolves everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that promote healthy tissue until it heals.
But if it does not heal this way, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then inquire into that area and dry it out as we have recommended, unless there is any obstruction of a vein, nerve, or major limb, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then heal it with water that promotes skin growth until it heals.
And if it does not heal and produces pus as before, then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again with great care, scrape it thoroughly, and cleanse it with the strongest solution you have, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then know that this corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot do anything about it except to try to reach it.
And if the bone is slightly corrupt, and it is possible for you to pull it out, then do so with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then skillfully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
But if you encounter any resistance due to the humidity, and there is no fear or mistake in making the incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh that are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that moment, then place something on the wound that will keep it moist, and leave it until that region becomes soft with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not become consolidated, and constrict the section that you have cut during your operation.
Let's translate the given text into English line by line:
If the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and only the surface of it is affected by decay, then scrape away the rotten part from behind until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
However, if the decay has spread to a large part of it and has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to cut away all of it until the corruption has been completely removed, and then treat it until it has healed.
And I recommend that you remember this, which happened to a man in his hip, as an example and guide for your operation.
There was a young man around thirty years old who experienced pain in his hip, and from the inside part it spread to the inside of his body until it reached the hip, and it was a matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
And so the time was prolonged with it due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and pus flowed from it, and his treatment was then paused until his thigh was made into a fistula, and in him many openings were made which all drained pus and the humors of the body.
And then a multitude of doctors gathered around him for two years, and none among them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
And I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from him through those large vessels; and already the body of that man was completely decayed and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those vessels and the probe reached the bone.
And soon after, I explored all the orifices and found that they reached the bone from every part of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it to be corrupt, and already it was earthy and rotten and blackened; and already a part of the thigh was corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow. 》
And then I removed that which was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather in that corruption which I cut away and removed, and I had already scraped it away.
And then I applied remedies for healing the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I will cut and expose again according to the initial exposure, and I will find continuous corruption with the bones.
And I will take care of that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I have been pierced to make the cure and restoration of him, and he is not restored.
And then I exposed him again and did not stop cutting the small bones piece by piece specifically, and I pierced his restoration, but he was not restored until I cut around one palm's width of him, from which I extracted the marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut further, except for the disposition of his weakness and the little tolerance he has and fear of death, because he faints at all hours due to an excess of bad syncope.
And therefore, he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing hard in the place of bones; and his disposition has been well established in his body and his strength has returned; and he lives according to his dispositions and does not contradict him in walking or harm him for any reason.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
"And place a plank under the bones respectfully, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use a saw that cuts through the rotten flesh.
"And the sawing should be done little by little on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear to the touch, then force will have to be applied to the saw again.
"And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, before you continue with the other part, check if the corruption is in the middle or a part of it. Then peel back the flesh from all sides entirely; and place a plank underneath, and then saw through the first part where the corruption has entered, until the cutting continues to the next part.
"And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
"And if the corruption is in a joint, cut open that rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
"And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but cunning.
"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should investigate how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and clean it according to each possible situation, and with whatever cunning you have, straighten it as best you can, without cutting against a vein or nerve.
And know that there are different types of saws and the sawing of these bones depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, size, delicacy, largeness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you must prepare the appropriate instrument for each type of operation.
And know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument needed; for you have great skill and experience in the ways of this art, and are familiar with various diseases. Therefore, you can apply the appropriate instrument to each disease.
And I conclude this chapter by listing the number of instruments you will use as essentials, with which you will proceed to your practice, and which you will test on others. Type of saw:
Another type of saw is the trepan. It is used for making circular incisions in bone.
Yet another type of large saw is the hacksaw, which is used to cut through thicker bones.
Type of reamer (also known as a borer): The head of this reamer should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its points should be like those of an awl.
And it is not appropriate except that with this they are rubbed on the joints when they are inflamed, or if the mouth is very large.
A smaller form of a razor:
A flat form of a razor:
Another decently made form of a saw: It should be made into an arch shape from the top part and its sharpness made of iron, with the wooden handle parts decently made. The shape of it:
A form of a razor which has a hollowed-out section:
Another delicate form of a razor:
Another curved-tip form of a razor:
A small form of a razor resembling a scorpion's tail:
Another smaller form of an incisor:
The shape of another incisor, this one resembling a ray, with its tip like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
The shape of a file which is suitable for scraping out the marrow from the bones.
And its tip is triangular and pointed.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is necessary that all the rules we mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply to this as well.
Regarding the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
The extremities can be amputated for either an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption will go to a member which has not been affected by any cause. In this case, it is necessary to incise that member where the corruption occurs, so that the patient may avoid death or a greater deterioration of the limb.
And the sign of this occurrence is that the member becomes black until it is believed that fire has burned it, or you can perceive a similar blackness until gangrene spreads throughout the body of the patient; and then proceed with the incision of that part.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is from a venomous strike, such as from a sea scorpion, viper, or a similar creature.
And if the corruption or swelling is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter the hand.
And similarly, if it spreads to the hand, then you should incise that from the root of the finger, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the forearm of the arm.
And if it spreads there, then you should incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond the elbow and surrounds it, then at that point is the death of the patient; and to administer any other treatment in this case is futile.
And similarly, do for the foot when corruption spreads to the toes of the foot, then you should incise that up to one of the joints.
And if it reaches the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it ascends into the shinbone, then you should incise the leg up to the knee joint.
And if the corruption has already reached the shinbone, then in him there is no hope but to abandon the patient and let them die.
The method of cutting or tying off the limb is as follows: you should have one bandage on the part below where you want to cut, and tie another bandage over it; and let the assistant extend a bandage to the parts below, and let the assistant also extend another bandage above; and you separate the flesh that is between two bandages into a space until all the flesh is exposed; then it should be cut or tied off.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed between them and all parts of the body, so that the healthy area does not touch, and that the wound may heal properly and the abscess may be cauterized.
But if there is bleeding while operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or place some powders on it that restrain the blood; and then return to your procedure until it is completed.
And then bind the affected member with a bandage as appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that if you encounter this in a man's foot, this same accident which I and you have mentioned, which is that blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was similar to the burning of fire.
And that corruption first happened in his toe before spreading throughout the entire foot.  (Here, "corruption" likely refers to the spread of infection or necrosis.)
And then that man prepared for himself some putrid matter, thinking that the cure would go to the member with great vigor and would remove his pain and burning, and he inserted that foot up to the joint, and it became healthy.  (Here, "putrid matter" refers to a poultice or other topical remedy containing rotting substances, which was thought to draw out infection and promote healing.)
Long ago, the same corruption occurred in the mouth of my hand.
Therefore, it came to me and I was prompted to expel that excess with the water I placed on my hand with medicines, for the cleansing of his body; and the excess did not return, but instead began to go to the other finger until it started in my hand.
And he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that because I hoped for the return of that excess, and also because I feared the amputation of his hand would be fatal, as the vitality of the patient was fading.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and it was reported to me that that man prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and he was cured.
And I have not related this story except to serve as an aid in this disease, and that it may be a sign by which the cause is recognized and according to which the cure is carried out.
On the treatment of sinuses and the method of enema with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended to the point that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is also thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it does not press on bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption begins in any member, then it is called a fistula and not gout.
And the treatment for it is that you insert a string all the way in this manner as it is turned, especially when it is made thin and with cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the string will stick and that this corruption has not reached its final stage, and there is an opening at the end of the string, then treat it with a clyster.
And consider the hollow space, and if it is large, and if the arm or leg smells fetid, then treat it with an Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and vinegar and juniper berries, divided into equal parts, placed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer a clyster to the hollow space with this, and strengthen the opening of it, and let the medicine remain inside for the duration of two hours.
And then you remove that with a syringe; and do this for as many days as it takes to cleanse the wound and remove the stench.
And sometimes it is necessary to administer an enema with ash water when this medication is not available to you; and that is for you to take the ashes of grapes, place them in water, then strain that and administer the enema with it until you feel certain that the wound has closed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed together, strained three times; and also administer an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for by the nature of honey it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this a few times and feel certain that the wound has healed, then administer an enema with water that promotes the growth of flesh in it.
And it is necessary to take Diasquama ointment and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you administer an enema with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for the enema, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron instrument, and place in it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened.
Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should gather its lips together with a suture and allow only the amount necessary for the insertion of the enema without addition.
And if the orifice from which the arm exits is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part of the wound so that the arm runs below, because when the arm is constricted at the narrowness of the sinus, the flesh will be generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus into the lower part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with a preparation through which the arm may run lightly according to what appears suitable to you, and so that no obstacle will hold the arm within it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, you should change frequently to ensure that what is in it does not dry out from the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from his arm is too much or too little, whether it is digested or undigested.
And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it has an abscess.
And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you may detach it on the third day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if from the belly an indigestion lasting many days has come out, then know that the belly does not adhere; and if the adherence of the belly is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you must dry it with medicines. If the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like an ointment of diachylon, when there is an excess of fluid accumulation in it.
And the best cure for this is to take some diachylon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and let it be applied in a thin layer on its substance, and then prepare that with him, and use it.
And if there is no diachylon ointment, take myrrh and aloe and sesame seeds, grind them all together and powder it over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and strengthen that over the belly; and apply that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over a cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes it is administered with him longoria and rhizomes of lilium celeste (which is lilium celeste), and flour of irises and centaury, and use those simples or ajustados, grind them and sift them and powder them over the honey which you have counted; and use it.
And if the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in his spleen, and it already makes an inquiry in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure him with a fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
Of the treatment for paronychia and nail infection, as well as for added finger incisions and amputation.
Paronychia is an abscess that forms at the base of the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also form on other fingers. When it persists and its treatment is less valued, it becomes a chronic abscess or it becomes corrupted, throwing pus into the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire nail, and then its corruption reaches the bone, making it smell foul, and the tip of the finger is lame, and its color turns dark.
Therefore, when you have that [condition] as we have said in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with an iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very beneficial for this.
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate the text line by line. Here it goes:
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must cut out the affected bone and extract it, because no time can heal a corrupted bone.
And if you see the corruption and decay advancing into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints according to the remembered method, and then treat it so that it heals.
But if the nail has been struck or bruised and severe pain follows, then at first bleed the patient, and next dry the nail with a sharp spoon, making a transverse cut from above to below, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh under the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and it will cause excessive growth of superfluous skin in that place; and then treat that place with water that relieves pain.
But this superfluous skin, which is common in the hands of some men, is very light and fleshy, and very light on the bones, or very light on the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their growth is in some joints of the fingers. But one who is born in certain nodes of the said [part] does not suffer, and this one who is born in the joints feels it very lightly.
And of those who are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is that you must lift the said one with a Latin spatula.
But of one who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of the incision of him.
But in one who is born in this with the nodes, it is necessary that you incise at the beginning of his flesh with a round incision to the bone, and then saw with one of those saws suitable for this, and then care for him until he is healed.
But the consolidation that happens to the said nodes, whether by nature of birth or by wound healing or by burning with fire, or by similar causes, then it is necessary to section that consolidation until the nodes return to their natural form.
And then place between them cloths soaked in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate between them, or place between them a thin lead sheet until it is healed as needed.
"And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of these with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Of the vice of swelling, they are varicose veins.
"Varices are swellings, and they are large, engorged veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the members of the body, most commonly appearing in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and bearers.
"Therefore, it is necessary that you administer black hellebore purgative to the body several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
"However, the treatment of them with iron is done in two ways: one way is to make an incision and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
"The section of it is done in this way: first, apply hot water to the leg until the thick blood dissolves and becomes liquid, which is caused by the leg. Then bind the patient's leg tightly from above the knee to below the groin with a bandage. Next, make an incision in one or two or three places on the vein with a wide cut, and then lift out the black blood from below the leg with your left hand upwards, and then downwards, until the desired amount of blood has been removed, which will restore the patient's health.
And then bind that area, and command the patient to abstain from black bile-inducing foods.
And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and this is known to the patient.
But the elevation of them is done in this manner: you who lift the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then put it in a bath and immerse the patient's leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins become prominent; or if it is to be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you, until the limb is made tender.
And then dry the cord on the right side of the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it, and you must denude it, or in the lowest part of it you must find the tendon.
And then open the cord with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must look for its appearance; that which appears black when seen will bend downwards.
And so, as you remove the vein from the cord, if you see a white one, it should be left as a thread.
And then place that vein in such a way that it is raised and detached from the cord, and suspend it with a needle of gold.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
And do this until you extract that which is the most supreme or highest of all sections, until it is all removed; then incise that area.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a double-threaded needle with a strong wire and tie it off, or insert underneath it the reed and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient with that injury.
And when you have completely removed that part, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and both olive oil and unfiltered olive oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted with tortuosity in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must make incisions all along its tortuous course and at its points of attachment, and then suspend that part with hooks until you elevate it completely.
And be careful with your section that you do not cut the vein and that it does not injure that part, for it will become difficult for you to elevate that; and preserve your skill in this matter.
Form of the incident with which one's life is ended.
It is not to the same extent as with the fingers, nor is it of acute extremity, so that it does not affect the vein; and it is of great flexibility, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; and there is in it a superfluous thickness, as we have said.
Of the removal of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as Almería (Al-Andalus) in Arabic lands and in the hot and dry lands of India, which are sparse in fertility and where neither grass nor trees grow.
And it is generated strongly in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
Its generation is due to putrefaction that comes from the intestines, as do poisons inside the body, such as those from snakes, worms, and scorpions, which generate between the intestines and the flesh.
The sign of the occurrence of this condition is that this vein, which occurs in the thigh, causes a very intense inflammation; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant.
And then when the extremity appears from the patient, it is necessary that you wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is between one and two pounds, tighten it and let the lead hang from the thigh.
And as many times as something comes out of the patient due to some cause on the outside, wrap it in lead and tighten it. And if the discharge is prolonged, then cut off a part of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that which is already coming out until it has completely emerged, because if you cut it off prematurely it will constrict and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the area and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it has completely exited from the patient and nothing remains within the body.
And this discharge has come out of some men to a length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has already come to my attention that one came out twenty palms long.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the finger into the opening and make a long incision through the body until all of the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat it according to the treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has large branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to him with many openings, and each opening is full of branches.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned above.
On the removal of worms generated under the skin, and this is called cattle plague.
This illness is named in some lands as cattle plague because many times it happens to cows and there is a worm within which is born between the skin and the flesh, and it goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and it shows its movement from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, as happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then quickly it blinds him and enters and destroys the eye, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to treat and remove it, then do not act unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry it out over it and extract it.
And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find a cause, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until it dies, and the main reason to be feared is corruption of the area, as we have said.
And if you see that the abscess has reached near the eye, then strengthen the eyebrow with a strong bandage, and then cut it open, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purging medicines to cleanse their body of bad putrid humors, and they should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
About cutting due to nasal pain.
This illness is called in our land "nasal pain," and it is a pain that comes to some members, and often changes from member to member.
And I have seen it according to what I will tell you. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation moving like a worm going upwards, but more lightly than if it were a spider, as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
And then it goes away from that place and settles in the muscle, and then you stay here for an hour.
And then it moves through the rest of the body until it reaches the other arm.
And then I recall that it was turning around throughout the entire body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at its transformation and speed from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my eyes in the same way, but I have never seen words that cause pain being transformed from one limb to another. But I did not see it with the eyes as in a woman.
And I did not think that this was anything other than because the woman was old, and her body was dry and her veins exposed, and in this condition it appeared to the senses as that transformed windiness.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in this way due to the backward course of treatment in those who are delicate and have bodies with moist veins.
And when you want to treat the patient, and they feel this pain, then it is not apparent to the eye as we have said. Then you strengthen yourself against that, and let them lie down lightly and quietly until that constrained windiness has come out, and cauterize the place.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"De extraccio de sagetas" translates to "On the removal of arrows.
"Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, as their diversity lies in those with large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, solid ones; and those with three angles; and those with tongues; and those with barbs.
"And the signs of danger are when an arrow strikes and passes through bone, especially if it exits from the fontanelle on top of the skull, for then there is severe dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, burning sensation in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, and speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Also, from the site of the wound comes a white, powdery discharge, and the patient's eyes take on a watery appearance like that of raw meat.
And so if these signs appear to you, then you should refrain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
But the signs of an arrow wound when it strikes the heart are such that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels with it that it is lodged in a hard object, not a hollow one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and dark blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foul odor, and fainting; and thus you should know that death will come suddenly.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are foamy blood coming from the wound, and the veins near the neck are distended, and the patient's color changes, and they exhale a large amount of spirit, and they crave cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane located in the foot, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and a great deal of anxiety will be felt with violent pain and sighing, and not all the limbs' muscles will be functioning well.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound in large quantities.
If the arrow hits the belly and is stuck in it, there may be a tear in the wound or tissue, or an intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for his cure unless the arrow is extracted.
If the arrow hits the bladder and urine exits, and any cause prevents it from healing outside, and if the pain is strong on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and arms, ribs of the back, collarbone, hip, thigh, and similar parts of the body are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you about this, which I have seen concerning the nature of these arrows, so that you may know what to do for their treatment.
The reason is that in one man an arrow was shot into the tear duct of his eye and the root of his nose. I extracted it from him on the other side, leaving the gray hairs of his ear, and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if the judge is the patient, and he has not suffered a bad accident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with the feathers; and then I made an incision on that between two veins, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I took it out carefully with that, and afterward I extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in the abdomen, and I thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and no bad accident befell him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck the back, and the wound was healed over him, and after about seven years, the arrow came out at the root of the scapula.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the wound was healed inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any damage to any of her natural functions.
"And I saw another man upon whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed and the arrow broken off, but he felt little pain, and similar symptoms to these.
"And the arrow was removed from the man by the king's leaders, who had been struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
"And I was called to care for him soon after the shooting of the arrow within three days.
"And then I found the wound made by the arrow very narrow; and then I examined it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt pricking below his right ear, and so I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
"And I covered the area with a plaster containing attractive and digestive virtues, hoping that the area would swell so that the location of the arrow might appear to me, in order to act upon it.
"And no significant swelling occurred in the area that would indicate the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days, but no swelling occurred; meanwhile, the wound healed, and the patient recovered from the extraction over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and reported this to me.
And then I placed medicine on the wound that is sharp and corrosive for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I tested it, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the medicine in the opening of the wound so that it became visible to me, and time passed with this for four months.
And after the wound was widened and I could insert forceps into it, and they remained there without causing pain, then I did not cease to be subtle and clever with various methods until one day I began to extract it with finely made forceps, as will be shown in the form of those at the end of this chapter; and thus I removed it. And after that, I healed the wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was healed, and the patient was cured completely without any recurrence.
And I told you the quality of extraction of some arrows, so that you may take note and understand what has not been said, for the principles of this art and its definitions are not understood by mere narrative or by books.
And the wise craftsmen compare with a little on words; and with what is present over what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments for descending from the extraneous causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore, I say that arrows are not driven out of the limbs into which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or by contrast with the other parts.
And that which is thrown by the place into which it has entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and it is pulled out and driven out.
And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it falls, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
Similarly, if it is stuck in bones and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for a few days and apply attraction and moisture to it each day, and it will be driven out.
And if it does not obey your extraction after a few days, then you must pierce around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a thin drill until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden within the body and has lost sensation, then you should search for it with your hands, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some of the instruments suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins here, then you should cut deeper into the wound until it is widened enough to make it possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is lodged in the ribs, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides as much as you can; and work on it, if you cannot remove the arrow by cutting the fracture of the ribs or twisting them until it comes out.
Certainly! Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And if you cannot do it in your own time, then leave it for some days until the affected parts can heal, and then try again when it has been relieved. But if blood flow is causing resistance, then administer the treatment we mentioned in the previous chapter.
And be careful not to injure a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer the remedy in every possible way to avoid the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have advised you.
And thus, perform the procedure in a way that aligns the arrow with the affected area, following the shape and trajectory of the arrow as it entered the body, for this is more beneficial. But if that is not possible, then administer what you can according to the shapes.
But if the arrow has exited through the opposite side or if any part of it has protruded from the body, or if the tip of the arrow is bent due to the pressure of the projecting part above the collarbone, then you should cut it off; and the incision should be made according to the amount by which the forceps can grasp; and then pull it out, for it will come out easily with this method.
Here's the translation of your sentence:
And otherwise, leave it for several days, then repeat until it heals.
And if the arrow's shaft is still in it, then you pull it out with your hand.
However, if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert a hollow instrument into it, if it is blind (i.e., the wound is closed), a concave instrument so that the concavity of the instrument fits around the head of the arrow, and then pull it out with your hand.
However, if the arrow is barbed, then you pull it out with a strong instrument entering the wound, because the arrow is lodged there.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh in which the venom is located, as much as possible, and then treat it with the appropriate remedy.
And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it, being careful not to cut into a vein or nerve. Then extract the arrowhead, and bandage the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
"The shape of the forceps with which arrows are pulled out.
"Their tips are shaped like a bird's beak, made like a saw to grip the arrow so that it is not released.
"And from these are made many varieties of forceps, large and few in number, according to the size of the arrow and its narrowness, as well as the width of the wound and its constriction.
"like a ray, to facilitate its entry into the arrow's cavity and be pushed out with it.
"About phlebotomy of the veins.
"The veins that are commonly used for phlebotomy are XXX, of which there are sixteen in the head, including two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two veins on each temple; two veins on each lacrimal duct of the eyes, known as aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins in the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip — these are called algelic; and there are two veins beneath the tongue. Based on the pattern you provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Here's a translation of the given sentence:
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrh, headaches, and old sores on the head.
And the method of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done on top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are located with a wide cloth and good friction; then bind the patient's neck tightly with a bandage until the two veins and their locations appear near the ears in two depressed areas of the head; and you will seek that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is the sign.
Then you take the lancet knife, and it should be sharp, and then you insert it below the vein in the neck until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the separated parts above and make an incision on the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and let out as much blood as you wish.
And then strengthen with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of this book, the description and their cauterization have been mentioned.
But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the help for phlebotomy is to emigraine, antique and severe headache, obstinate malaria, and acute superfluous outbursts at the temples.
And the manner of bleeding those [veins] is as I have advised you: constrain the patient's neck so that both veins are felt clearly by perception, and let their pulse be shown beneath your finger; then you will know with certainty.
Then lift the blade above the vein to its divided part with your index finger, and insert the flebotomist's incision below, and raise the vein up; and cut it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultices over it, strengthening it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the memory of them has been included, and from there the insertion, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the venipuncture of the frontal vein is similar to the venipuncture of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, including migraine, fever, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of his venipuncture depends on what I tell you; thus, the patient should strengthen his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called a scoop, and this is its form.
Place the tip of the scoop at the top, which is on the end of the scoop, over that vein and strike it with a hammer or another heavy object in this manner. Allow the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire; then clean the wound of the patient and strengthen it until it heals.
Sometimes it is opened with a wide venipuncture instrument, but it is not necessary for the venipuncture to be as sharp as other venipunctures; instead, let it be dull at the tip, and make that venipuncture transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and a fine venipuncture would break on it.
Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And the nature of bloodletting is such that the patient holds their neck with a band, and then you perform the bloodletting on those areas, while standing over their head.
And the bloodletting should be done according to the transverse [direction] a little along its length with small incisions, because in this area there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, then the end of it will be broken off strongly.
Then allow the blood to flow as much as is necessary for you, and place cotton over those areas, and hold them tight for one night, and then remove them.
However, bloodletting from the nasal vein is suitable for treating acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial diseases and migraines that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the method for bloodletting from it is that the patient holds their own neck and then you take their nose with your left hand, take a fine and long lancet, and place it in the middle of the bridge of the nose along its straight line, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Be careful to move your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it for one night, because this heals easily.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that the patient lies face down on their side with a cloth covering them; and let the practitioners be over the head of the patient, while the patient sits on a stool.
And then proceed to perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a broad fleam little by little; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or as many times as necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then uncover the cloth and tightly bind both veins so that the patient is not too weakened, and leave until morning when the wound has healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of the major veins is to cure small boils and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, and wrap their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips inside out and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the indication of each is by their darkness compared to both, and this is more so because around them are small black veins; and then cut each with a cutting incision.  This final sentence contains a few unusual words, such as "inscicio inscident" which seems to refer to a specific type of incision used for phlebotomy. I've translated it literally as "cutting incision.
If there is any doubt on your part and you don't know which of them it is, then you should proceed with an incision into the larger and more evident of the two.
And make sure to mimic both veins that are on the lips above.
But concerning the two veins that are under the tongue, it is appropriate to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein at the forearm, for headaches, sore throats, and mouth diseases.
And the way to phlebotomize these veins is to make the patient sit between your hands in front of you, raise their tongue, look under the tongue, and on one side of the vein there will be a dark color and on the other side it will also have a dark color.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to push too hard with your hand when phlebotomizing these, because underneath them are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are customary in all men, and their phlebotomy is done in two ways: either by placing the pointed fleam on the subtly inclined median cubital vein or by using a lancet, and it is called this way.  (Note: "fleam" is an old term for a surgical instrument with a sharp point used to puncture veins for bloodletting)
"As often as its leaves, and it is suitable for opening the large, full veins that are clearly visible and contain thick, impure blood.
"And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle in its extremities, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain fine, citrine blood.
"But the help of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from illnesses that are beneath the throat and the neck, and from what affects the feet and the belly.
"And it is fitting for the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious with it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs or presses too hard in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this phlebotomy with a pointed phlebotomy instrument before cutting with herbs.
And if the vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave that area and move to another, or seek a nearby branch; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is clearly visible; and afterwards, proceed with phlebotomy similarly as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same arm, then touch the area in front of the narrowing of the arm until you feel the pulse, and then mark the spot with ink; and then lift the arm and locate the vein with a concave section [of the lancet], and proceed with phlebotomy similarly as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery at any point in the area.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the area that you marked with ink, then that swelling is a sign of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and at that time cut and place your finger over it for a long period; and then remove your finger, and if the blood continues to flow, because it often does, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And keep an eye on the patient's urine and be concerned about it; do not disturb them for some days until they are healed.
But if the blood has not clotted and there is no medicine at hand to deal with this, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity is contracted and the blood has clotted. Or take some lint of fistic, make a poultice with it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein with stricture, descent, bandage, and powder until the next day.
And then if the blood has clotted, it is good; and if not, then cure it with the water mentioned earlier to help remember the place of clotting blood flow.
And the absorption of the blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm being bandaged.
But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial because it extracts blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; this is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
Here's the translation of the given medieval medical text:
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein lengthwise.
The assistance of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and improves diseases of the eyes.
It is particularly appropriate in this case to use either the olive phlebotomy or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not adjoin an artery or nerve.
However, in some men, it is very easy to cause swelling if the first percussion mark is not used for phlebotomy; but do not mark again on that spot of swelling.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only to preserve health and with the hope of preventing illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilic; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after a meal when signs of fullness appear.
And if bloodletting is done, it should be performed on the third day or before three hours of the first day have passed.
But bloodletting that is administered should be done when it causes convenience and necessity for this purpose, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is fitting that an infant not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be bled except between the fourth and seventh months, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And if someone wishes to be bled in some manner, they should cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a clyster of lye, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities from the purulent intestines into the bloodletting of the veins, which are harmful and damaging to the main members.
And patients with certainty of nausea or drunkenness should not be bled, nor those who are recovering from illness or inebriation until it has been removed from them, nor hydropic patients. Furthermore, bloodletting should be feared for cases of colic and vomiting, and for bellyache, and for an increase in sexual activity and labor and fasting exercises or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal. 》
And then carefully consider in subtle detail the quality of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medications if that is possible for the patient.
And then enter a bath if no cause prevents it, or exercise through some physical activity so that the blood may be thinned.
And perform phlebotomy on him at the foot of the day, when it is around the third hour, as we have said.
And ensure that the foot of that patient is guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily incidents, such as work and unnecessary pain, sex and similar things to them.
And in his room, let there be present the causes of which it is customary for men to use with fragrant ointments and scents, and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
Then withdraw his arm and have the phlebotomist rub it with their hand two or three times; then tie the bandage tightly with a strap and wrap it around two times.
And if the stricture is treated, because the stricture when it is not equal or the stricture is with superfluity, then you should avoid blood flow; or it is with softening, and then you should prevent the body from emptying the blood.
And then the stricture should be treated with bloodletting: the person who needs to be bled should rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible to the touch.
And then the bloodletter should anoint his bloodletting instrument with a little proper antiseptic oil; and he should place his left index finger over that vein, below the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein bulges slightly, and the pulse is quieted. For of the veins is the one you find like this when fleeing cords, in which case you should perform the bloodletting. And it is those veins that are full of windiness; when you place the bloodletting instrument over them, they contract, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the bloodletting instrument does not touch the vein, and if it touches, then that one is narrow.
Therefore, for this reason, the bloodletter must be skilled and attentive to all these factors.
Based on the context and the pattern observed in the provided translation, I would interpret the sentence as follows:
And if the area is inflamed or the patient faints, then leave it for a day or two, and do not apply any bandages, because a strong tug will pull out pus, nor enter into a bath.
Then proceed with phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then perform phlebotomy in that spot again according to correct practice, and adjust the opening slightly. Do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, because in many cases an inflamed area requires a larger opening.
But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not perform phlebotomy on it again, because it does not allow for any reason to be done so; and place a poultice of olive oil on the area, because this alleviates the body from blood. And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
Similarly, apply a poultice of olive oil to every phlebotomy wound that you make on the veins, which prohibits bleeding from the body, and prepare terebinth, aloes and sage when one of them is placed over the area, because blood becomes thinner and moves more easily when it is thick.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess has formed, which often happens and especially to those who have not been bled except this time or during the opening of the vein, then you should cut [the skin] and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly pressed, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or another.
And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place on it some paste made of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or some mint juice, or something similar to that.
And frequently such abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find it to be soft, you should press on it, because that swelling is bad and dangerous; and then take care to place on it some of the substances we have mentioned, for it will flow a lot from the artery.
"And make a plaster with water that has been boiled down to reduce its volume, so that the area becomes hardened, and then continue to care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
"And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the color that prevails on the blood as it appears.
"Because if the blood is black, then let it be drained until it becomes red; and similarly if you see that it is thick, then let it be drained until it is made thin; and similarly if it is sharp, then drain it until its sharpness is removed.
"And for those who are full and strong and have a need to extract blood in one sitting, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased, and the phlebotomies should be spaced out.
"And for those who are frail, the opposite should be done: it is necessary to extract blood from them in several sittings, and the cut should be small.
"And the best method for vein phlebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
"And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary for syncopation to occur, you must perform phlebotomy, and it is necessary that before the phlebotomy you care for him with a small piece of bread soaked in vinegar of milfoil or simple oxymel; and extract blood from the vein in three or four times.
And if it is a cold of the chest, then before phlebotomy take bread soaked in honey syrup of myrrh or honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or very fragrant honey syrup.
And if syncopation occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to the loss of too much blood, then it is necessary to drink water of meat and very fragrant subtil honey syrup; and use aromatics with rosemary, and anoint your feet with it.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And if one wants to extend their arm and dissolve their blood gradually, it is necessary for the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that they extract the blood little by little, according to the quantity of strength in continuous days.  In other words, if the patient is weak, don't take too much blood at once; instead, spread out the phlebotomies over several days.
"But those who wish to raise their arm, and discharge their blood again, and whose body is strong, should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
"But those who wish to draw blood from the opposite side of the body compared to where they incline, should be raised on the second or third day.
"But in a body where much blood has been cut and it is heated and causes fever, one should discharge the blood in one go and a large quantity should be discharged, and the opening should be enlarged until syncope occurs; because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand on his pulse, so that he does not die from it instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
"And it is not advisable when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press hard on the hand with force and stretch it slightly; because this is too bad.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
"And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them at that spot or in another vein on the other arm.
"And the vein known as 'Funis of the Arm' is blood-let in place of the axillary or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, since it is composed of those.
"And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient put their hand in hot water until the needle becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
"And then he is strengthened on that limb with a moderate bandage; and then bloodletting is performed along the transverse small veins, not broadly nor lengthwise.
"And let the opening be wide and your bloodletting with it should be on the joint of the hand, a little.
"And if the blood flow is stopped, then you should immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeating the hand in hot water, and instead the body is placed in hot water during winter time.
And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all the other veins, because after it there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the small vein on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you strengthen his hand with a bandage or your own hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then puncture it transversely. And if you cannot do this for any reason, it will not matter.
And be careful not to finish the phlebotomy with your hand, because after that are the nerves of the fingers, which are bare of flesh.
Then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, preventing further bleeding.
And when the blood has been extracted according to the necessary quantity, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it is not hardened immediately; and similarly, you should do this in every narrow branch.
But the benefit of phlebotomy from the left arm is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy from the other side as you have done with the previous one.
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases and menstrual retention, and for leg and thigh ulcers, both old and new, and similar diseases.
And the manner of this phlebotomy is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then tie a band around the ankle; and where the vein appears prominently, make incisions with your fingers.
And therefore, blood let the largest branch or below the thigh near the heel of the patient, because it is better and safer.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then you must be careful not to cut the nerves that lie beneath the skin on the surface of the foot. Place your phlebotomy instrument at an angle across the area as if you were cutting it.
And make sure that your phlebotomies are visible.
But if the bleeding is forbidden, then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then try again with the phlebotomy instrument a little higher up, as the area is salty; and do not fear being clumsy, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
Do the same for the saphenous vein on the other foot as well.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, near the heel beneath the wild plant (likely referring to a specific landmark or anatomical structure).
And the assistance for the phlebotomy of him is at the level of the hip when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and he should fast and strengthen his thigh from the hip to the heel with four turns in a long, thin bandage, so that it is barely noticeable.
And so when it appears, you should perform phlebotomy according to each person's nature and as much as possible along the transverse line, which is better; or you can increase it by incision or dry it out by cautery, because the location of it is hot.
And it is often found in many men; and if you find it [the vein], and it doesn't appear throughout the body, then bleed some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
And be careful with the nerves, and let the blood flow in the amount you desire.
Then immediately relieve the constriction and place on the site of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthen the site, for it is lightly healed.
About cupping and the qualities to use them.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or crystal.
And cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping that is without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
And in the places where cups are applied with scarification and bloodletting, there are fourteen places on the body: one of which is called alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and cups under the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and cups of the two spatulas; and cups of the alohoster, which are over the end of the ribs; and cups of the two fingers, and they are on the two arms; and cups of the two ankles; and cups of the two groins.  (Note: The translation is a bit uncertain, especially with the last few phrases.)
And bloodletting should not be performed except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by doing so, the virtue is not lost as it is in phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by plethora until the entire body has been evacuated.
But if necessity requires bloodletting due to illness or habit, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at the end, and at any other time as needed.
And therefore, when you see one of those causes, and especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, it is commanded that bloodletting be done because two or three hours have passed during the day.
And for the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when you apply it to the head, it brings relief to what is heavy in the head and settles in the temples; but it is better that this be an evacuation of the whole body.
And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
And it is not advisable to use this on someone who has a complete chill or who has a cold, because it can cause great harm to them.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use this on the elderly, and especially those whose heads are afflicted with cold.
But to those who are continuous with this, forgetfulness is done to them; and therefore it is necessary for you to command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly on the lancet below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But bloodletting from the elbow is in the location of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic [vein]: and with this you bring relief to asthma, and to the constriction of breath, and to the cutting of the instrument of breath, and to cough, and to fullness.
And it is necessary that the wound be uncovered a little, because if it is covered up, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And apply cupping to the back of the head for headaches, blindness, migraines, epilepsy, and toothache; it is an alternative to bloodletting at the vein.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand with scarification, lest he cut the artery and cause bleeding.
And cupping at the chin is applied for hiccoughs in the mouth, for corrupt gums, and for similar ailments that are in the mouth; it is an alternative to bloodletting of the veins on both lips.
But cupping that is done over both temples is applied for heatstroke, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And cupping at the two parts within the eyebrows is equivalent to bloodletting of three veins: the basilica, fusca and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all small veins in the flesh and small veins of other larger veins until attraction reaches the three main veins.
The text is likely written in a medieval Romance language, possibly a form of Old Occitan or Catalan given its similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here’s the translation:
And it is a cupping glass with which one cups over the buttocks and treats the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcerous sores located thereafter.
And command the cupping therapist to use a large cupping glass, made of iron, because the area requires strong heat; and make sure that the cups are very fine and that they have been scarified with a scarification.
However, smaller cups on the thighs are more effective in drawing blood from the whole body, and they help with old pains in the hips, back, and bladder; they also stimulate menstruation, helping with melancholy and sadness; they serve as an alternative to bleeding two veins, the jugular, and the two saphenous veins.
However, they greatly weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many men.
And regarding the recovery from cupping, it is similar to the recovery from cupping on both thighs.
And the quality of the cup position is that you place the cup initially empty and draw blood slowly, not prolonging the position of the cups but rather placing them gently and leaving them in place for a while until the fluids come to the surface gradually. And do not stop doing this and continue until you see the area turn red, swell up, and the appearance of blood.
And then you should make an incision and continue to draw out a little bit at a time, and also take into account the condition of the patient's body.
Because a man who has tender and delicate skin should only be incised once, not more, to avoid the area becoming ulcerated.
And instruct the cupping practitioner to widen the incision and prick a little, and then suck out with ease. ️
And if the blood is thick, then you should incise twice, because in the first incision, the pathway for the blood and its wateriness is opened. But in the second [incision], to achieve thorough drainage of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dark, then a third incision should be made so that you can obtain the last [remaining blood].
And finally, when we want to draw out the blood little by little or just a small amount, one incision is enough for us.
And if we want to draw out a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise with a deep incision.
And the term for making an incision is only as deep as the thickness of a cord.
And if the cord is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with gentle, open, resolving oils; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of sesame seeds from Cajun; and in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of sanicle, and similar oils.
And if the excess is thick and rough, then let the oil be amaranth, or oil of basil, or oil of aloe, or oil of dill, and similar oils.
But if the person receiving cupping has large pores and soft skin, then it is necessary that they be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that for them, before cupping, the places of cupping be washed with rose water or with harsh water of solatrum, or with water of Cajun, or with water of borage, and similar waters to those.
And that of which blood is very moist, wash its openings with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those (methods).
And of that from which the superfluities are large, wash its openings with old vinegar or with water of hyssop, which is majorana, or with a decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar to those (methods).
And it is advisable that the opening be protected before bathing; afterwards, it should be administered soon after the bath for one hour or two, and it is advisable to sleep near the opening.
What must be done to prepare a patient for bloodletting before cupping therapy?
It is advisable to consider at the beginning: if the person who will be cupped or bled is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, then they should take cooling remedies such as tart apples, sorrel in vinegar, endive in vinegar, lettuce, cucumber, syrup of roses, and similar substances.
And let their food be such as polenta, and meats of roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sour things, and the like.
And for those whose condition is severe, it is necessary that they drink aniseed syrup or aniseed syrup from seeds, and sumac, and half a handful of scented mint between meal times; and it should be recommended to them to use only a small amount of food and drink, and to avoid dishes such as poultry, cannabis, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And it is necessary that some men are given in drink at certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, theriac alpharac or musk medicine, which is nutmeg or mace, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take this potion.
But the bloodletting that is without incision should be done on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the kidneys, and the bladder of the anus, because these members do not tolerate incision on them.
And it is not used for this reason alone, but also to draw blood from the member, just as a cupping glass is placed on the breast in the illness of bleeding of the nose; and it is used so that the thick viscous windiness of the member is dissolved, just as a cupping glass is placed on the belly and navel; because this rarefies the member and softens it, relieving pain by resolving windiness.
And already placed on the ribs when it occurs in their inflammation or abscess, because by virtue of attraction, it quickly relieves inflammation and eradicates the abscess from its place.
And similarly, it does when placed on the liver and spleen to alleviate swelling in those organs.
And these cupping therapies are administered only with suction; and some times they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in cases of liver disease.
And this is because the cup must be filled and be large, whether it is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
The form of the cupping therapy administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of air within should be half a palm's length; and on the patient's back, in the place where the veins are visible, it should be half the size, with the hole being small enough to insert a needle.
It should be made of red copper or citrine, with thick edges, smooth and polished, so that it does not irritate the member due to its position on it.
"And place a candle with fire in the middle of an iron or bronze crossbeam, which is positioned above.
"And let this cupping glass be larger than the one we previously described, and the smaller one accordingly less based on the condition of the patient using it.
"And the cupping glasses for infants and weak individuals are different from those for the young and robust people.
"And the method for placing this cupping glass with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with decent firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbeam where the glass will be placed, so that the fire is ignited around the base to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
"Then place it on the patient's limb and cover it with the cloth as we have said, until when you have the cupping glasses and do not need to remove the cloth and let the vapor rise over that spot, then the glass will immediately be removed.
"And next, ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat this if you need more of it.
"But in the case of a cupping glass used for pleurisy, with water, there is no crossbeam or hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed only on the limb.
And this is its form: The larger this container is, the better it is, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Sanguijuelas are not applied to all members, but only to those in which it is not possible to place ventouses, due to the smallness of these, such as the foot and gums and their similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the teeth and nose and their similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you find is to use bloodsuckers that are in clean, still waters.
And then they should be placed day and night in still water until they are sluggish, and that there is no cause left in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with ventouses; and then the member of the patient should be rubbed until it reddens; and then they should be placed on him.
And when they are filled and fall off.
And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is more appropriate for healing.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if the blood is excessive, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place cooked fava beans on the area and let them sit until they stick to the spot, at which point the bleeding should stop.
And it is also necessary, when possible, to change those leeches.
And if leeches are not available, then the area should be wiped with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spot until it bleeds; and then they should be placed there, for those that sense any blood will quickly adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash on them, and they will quickly fall off.
Thus begins the chapter of the third section: Restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of broken bones and dislocated joints.
Oh son, be aware that fools and the common people boast about this chapter, as well as those who at any time did not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the wise ones in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time; and I have not added anything else to it, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their meaning, until I extracted the science from them.
And accordingly I directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experiment has passed; since I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered you from the labor of prolixity; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of the instruments that are used in it, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and collection of the causes of bone fractures, from which a necessary preface is required before we begin to recall the members fractured in various ways, each one by one. Therefore, in the preface of this chapter we will state the main points of the subject matter; and the chapters that at the beginning require the masters to be stationed on the truth of these; thus it is with you and those who are quick to learn or teach this noble art, others of you.
Based on the pattern of the provided translations, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then he should be content with food that is light and consists of green herbs, birds, and crabs; avoid heavy meats and filling oneself with food that clogs the veins with blood, until you are sure it is free from abscess, and if not, watch for matter leaving the member.
And then return the patient to his original diet which he was accustomed to before.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are abundant and heavy in viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, meat, heads, feet, stomachs of cows, sheep, fresh fish, fatty meats and similar ones. And with this diet the fracture is healed more easily and better.
And know that broken bones in men who are very old and weak cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And for this reason, it is necessary to remove the food from the patient, food that contains heaviness, stickiness, and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
I will now recall every type of fracture, presented in its own chapter, separate from the others.
Additionally, there is diversity within each type of fracture itself. And the types of bone fractures are further divided within themselves; for there is the arch-shaped fracture which occurs when stars fall upon it; and sometimes a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and protrusions, whether they protrude or not, as is done in the pen when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with bruising and tearing in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
This text appears to describe a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here's the translation line by line:
Motu signum fracturae ossis. And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: it is twisted and swollen, with a bump and sensitivity when touched or pressed by your hand.
And therefore if there is no visible swelling or sensitivity when you touch the bone with a slight shake and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it is just swelling or a small crack, so you should not move the affected area with your hand and apply pressure; place upon it medicines suitable for the moment, such as those that bind well; and then tie tightly with fine bandages.
And know that if the area is bent and not split in two or anything else happens to it, like a wound, when all its parts are moved from their place, then you should start at once with the straightening of it, having a poultice applied to it first.
And if a suppurating poultice is applied to it, then leave it for some days until the suppuration ceases; and then wrap it in any manner you can with lightness and skill.
And know that restoring and bloodletting him is easier than for bones in which this happens.
Then strengthen the second one, as remembering him will come later.
But if the bones are fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb, whether it is the hand or foot; use your hands for a small limb, or two ropes for a large one, or one rope and a hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural form, while the broken parts of the fractured limb are extended, and then you will make those additions return to their places with cunning and as best as possible for each part.
And be careful according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient due to your operation, neither pain nor injury; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in the best way possible.
And it is necessary that at that time you touch with your hand and if you find any different cause here, correct it and align it according to the amount of your skill.
And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who with their many observations cause pus to form due to their operation, or cause contracture in the limb, as we have seen this happen through their many observations.
And the quality of the splint for a calmed member is what I recommend; know that broken members are varied in their smallness and largeness and in their form.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or shin, it is necessary that there be a thick and hard wrapping, for the thick and hard wrapping holds together the large member and strengthens it from all sides with an equal splint, so that no bruise enters into it.
And then begin, during your evacuation of excrement, to place suitable bandages on that broken area with three or four wraps depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then come to that place on the upper part of the broken area, and strengthen less than when you make the stricture with which you have strengthened the broken area. And then extend yourself with an additional wrap on the broken area, and gradually loosen the stricture until you have taken a large part from the broken area.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again on the broken area, and then come to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the stricture of the bandage and in the loosening thereof according as we have said in the first wrapping above.
And then place between the wraps of linen or cloth with which is covered the twist of the fracture, if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage on top, and then cover these wraps with a decent-sized cloth immediately, if there is no swelling or abscess on the area, and then place on it whatever cures the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen over it with the cloths.
And let the sticks of the bed frame be made from sturdy cane or well-formed reed, or they may be made from pine wood; or from palm ribs. And let each stick be as wide as this form and figure:
And it is necessary that the stick placed over the fracture be a little thicker and sturdier than the other sticks, and the length of the stick according to the size of the limb, both large and small. Then strengthen the sticks with another bandage according to your initial wrapping, and then bind it securely with a decent strap as we have mentioned for the binding, so that the binding is tighter near the fracture, and the further it is from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
It is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made from silk. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some foolish people who use their threads from twisted ropes, it is a great mistake, because when the binding is too tight, it can cause equal damage.
And likewise, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with them what you want through binding, and it is not necessary that there be less than one finger's width between stick and stick.
And if the patient is bitten by the ends of the stars near the constriction in these places, then place under that some thick cloth or wool blanket until it does not cause harm to him.
Sometimes a fracture is with a wound, and there is a rupture in the cord, and I will come to remember that in the chapter according to its specific case.
And know that not every broken limb is bound with bandages on the first day; the reason for this is that if the limb is large, it should not be covered with bandages immediately but rather after about five days or seven or more, according to your caution of the possible formation of pus.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored [bones], which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
The method of plaster as described for the restoration of fractures is suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, because it does not require heat or cold: you should take flour dust, which is the soft part of the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill.
And make it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and the composition of it should not be too thick nor too thin; and then use this [plaster].
Certainly! Here's the translation of the given text into English:
Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
This is a translation of a medical text from the Middle Ages in Old Occitan. The sentence means: "Everything is ground to dust in a mortar with great care and then sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and administered.
"Method for plastering joints and bones separated from their places, where pain occurs in these areas, as well as cracks and fractures: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and hot oil, then place it on the area.
"However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but rather cauterizes and expels pain specifically.
"Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig tree and poppy, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
"Method for a short plaster administered to promote bone healing and resolution of remaining infection: take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the member is not cut.
"But if it is cut, then mix that plaster with water from cooked chicory leaves or with water and use it.
Based on the provided context and the similarity to medieval medical texts in various Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the given context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of the given sentence: And if a severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in that place, then you should cut or dissolve it immediately and remove the plaster from there.
And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with it wash the place until the swelling ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it onto it for a night until you are sure of a cautious abscess, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
And then repeat that gentle and small bandage, and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and refine it until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have already subsided completely, and you desire bandages and constrictions, then repeat it in the same way as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs in the member, then do not dissolve it but rather wait three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you by the dissolution of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.
And then adjust the constriction more than you did in your previous stricture, and adjust according to the thickness of the patient's food, as was mentioned before.
But if you see that the place of the fracture has dried out and atrophied more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is not reaching there; therefore, soak that part in lukewarm water every time you leave it; and this should be done for three days. Then slightly reduce the constriction, and through this operation, the nourishment will reach the member, and it will heal easily.
But what fools do when they try to reset a fractured limb at another time after it has not been properly set at the beginning, according to what is needed, and if it is set incorrectly, is an error in their operation and a great danger. And if this were done correctly, as the ancients have written in their books and have operated with.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it seems more reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter Two: When a fracture occurs in the head.
There are many types of fractures, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bone into pieces, which remain under the skin, just as happens with a stick, and for this reason this type is called comminution; or the weapon cuts off some part of the bone and cuts the flesh without reaching to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute amputation.
And this wound from these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture is either concave or convex; and its cause is impact with a club or falling on rock, and their appearances.
And this fracture is either penetrating, reaching the flesh beneath the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two fractures is either great or small.
And this fracture is such that it is confined within the bone, in the fineness of the small hair, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called a "hairline" fracture.
And this is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a rock, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts inside, and it happens in a concave place, just like what occurs to earthenware pots when they are struck and their entrance is divided into the inside parts.
And this happens most often in the bones of children, such as in their heads.
And to all these kinds of fractures, they are bad just like separate stars. And I will return with a reminder of all this in its place.
Sure, let's break down and translate this sentence:
And a type of herb is known by the fact that it is revealed on the bone, and it is washed, and anointed on it with oil, because the break appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider first the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the signs that it indicates fear by manifest sign, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of consciousness, lack of voice, fainting, acute fever, exudation of the eyes and heat of them, and similar signs in major dispositions, without doubt it will not heal.
And if you see non-serious accidents, you hope for health; then you begin the treatment of him.
The cause is that if the patient has been affected at the beginning as he was affected and this is in the winter days, then you should study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then you should try to set the bone before the seventh day, having that which remains of the bone be corrupted by the flesh, and that the accidents which we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and is with small divisions and attrition, then it is necessary to incise the divided and attrited partition as I will recommend to you.
And it is that you shave the patient's head where the wound is, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you according to the shape of the wound, and be gentle on the patient.
And if you notice the detection of bone fragments, blood flow or pus, then you should cover it with what is necessary, and that is to fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides, and you are sure there is no bleeding; and then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with a narrow chisel like this, and this is its form: And then administer another chisel like this, a little wider than the first; and this is its form:
And then use the widest chisel of the three.
And it is necessary that you have a variety of scissors, some longer than others; and some shorter than the others, with their tips being sharp, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease when pressing on the scissors so that you do not cut the tip and hurt yourself.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to drill a hole around it before you use the scissors with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
And they are not called that because those do not reach the end of the bone towards what is near it, but because the drill has a round tip or edge at its end that is sharp like a small margin or circle, which prevents it from penetrating and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which each one is suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with sharp tips, and the length and width are according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the method for three types of drills: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the drill to another location, and place it so that it traverses the entire thickness of the bone or its surroundings.
And then you should cut with scissors between each interstice of the bone, and make that pus as subtle as possible over this, in order to extract the bone, either with your hand or with some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And it is important that you take every precaution to ensure that the surgeon does not touch any of the patient's intimate parts.
And then, when you have bored through the bone and if it is attached to the flesh, you must remove it carefully with a sharp instrument similar to a scalpel, but more delicate and finer than other scalpels.
And if there are any small and splintered pieces of bone remaining, take them out with ease using the instruments you have at hand; then heal the wound with dressings and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is gentle and far from fear, which Galen speaks of and praises greatly; and his words are as follows: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the broken part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed underneath it the point of a slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular part should be sharp and not cut any tissue, while the pointed part should extend two fingers' width from the bone, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits closely to the flesh with its sharp edge against the bone.
And then strike the incision on one side with a small hammer until all the bones are cut through easily as it revolves, and make sure that no harm comes to the fat tissue, and if the doctor were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their trade; certainly, even if they were asleep.
Then if any cause is attached to the bones of the fat tissue in some places of the bone, cut it out with the pointed end of the incision tool, and deliver it from the tissue easily, because it can be delivered without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fat tissue, and what is cut or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with sharp razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient and correct places according to where your operation takes place on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer with your razor which you use to scrape the bones at the beginning, using the largest of those razors first, and then gradually move to the smaller ones, and do not stop doing this until you have administered the thickest and smallest of all of them.
In each of the other small or subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what has been lost for its correction.
And it is not appropriate over all those who have studied in this art. And what we have written about in major fractures, we have shown here.
And if the skin is removed when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in hot oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in wine and hot oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can on that, so that you do not press the flesh; and then administer to it a linen bandage, and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the size of the wound alone.
And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess has cauterized; and then unbind it and then administer medicines with which there is an excess of dryness, such as linseed oil and powder of lentils and of peas and similar to those.
Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English:
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there should not be any stupidity of ointment or other substances; nor should you allow virulence to increase in it; for when it is placed on the tissue of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons it, and something evil and malignant happens to the patient.
And it happens in the cavity of the head, especially when the bone is exposed and when its care has been neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if such accidents happen to the patient, you should know that it is deadly without any doubt.
And if there is no blackness except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is due to the power of that medicine that it causes this blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts of refined oil, and with these you should line a cloth, and then place it over the cavity; and then treat it with healing spices until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut off.
Know that the nose is not cut off except in two parts at once, or one of those parts being injured, because it has two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not cut but rather crushed and twisted and bent.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text: And let this be done by you with ease, and take care that it does not fall upon the suffering patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the nose does not reach that point, then it should be cut with the tip of a small needle.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed similarly.
And be mindful of the patient's recovery on the first day after the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you should wait for seven or ten days to allow for the resolution of the swelling.
And then insert the tip of a linen cloth into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part; or place two wicks, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the larger wick of such quantity that it fills the hole in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is necessary that the wick should be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered almonds; and then leave the wick until the bone is solidified and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes it may be necessary to intervene in the nose, in a place called the cavity, with an awl wrapped in linen cloth; and if the patient already has a severe nasal fracture and is not forbidden from breathing.
And this action is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it, or if you wish, make an incision.
And if at another time an abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if an abscess does not occur, then you should plaster the outside of it with sesame flour and powdered iris, mixed with egg white; and then place a linen bandage over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed with a small fracture, then it is necessary to cut over those areas and remove them with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then close the incision, and care for it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with incisions and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
This appears to be a chapter heading or section title in your medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .iiii." likely means "Chapter IV" or "Section 4".
About the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, then consider if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken into two parts but curved at the joints inside, in that case, its condition is light.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and push with that the swelling of the inside fracture towards the outside parts with ease, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; and thus you straighten it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of both parts according to their straightness until it becomes possible to align them.
And if there is disruption of the teeth due to the shock, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and then place wax on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it, and place a large well-made cloth or a sole of felt equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie it above in such a way that the tying is suitable for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And order the patient to rest and be calm, and restrict his food intake to small portions.
And if you believe that the shape has already changed in any way, then take care of it and release it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered from him and plaster it with powdered mill, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from him, and place clean wool over the plaster.
Then, when that plaster is well attached and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it in place, do not remove it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is healed in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess forms, then administer what we have said many times for his sedation until it is healed and the abscess has been removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is separated pieces of bone or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing those from the instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with the fleam according to the amount of your need.
And then, when you have removed those stitches and nothing comes out of them, then you should enlarge the orifice of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place on it one of the plasters suitable for this purpose and let it encrust until it is healed.
Chapter 5
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Often, the collarbone is broken from the anterior side due to a muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts without stitches occurring; and its restoration is easy; or it happens that stitches occur in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation for this [case] is that when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the broken collarbone and follows its movement, while the other extends the neck towards that side.
Then align the fracture with your hands until it has taken on its proper form and there is neither a prominent edge nor a concavity present.
And if you need more extension, then place a small pillow or wool pad under the patient's neck, and let its size be according to your necessity; extend and raise the chin and shorten the pad with your hand until it matches the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the chin outwards to its original position because it has reached the chest, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back with a pillow of moderate size placed under their neck muscles.
And the assistant presses on the patient's neck muscles towards the sides until the bone of the chin is raised and positioned correctly in the chest, at which point you should realign the fracture and secure it with your instructions.
But if you feel splinters of the chin bone and they are sharp, then it is necessary to cut over them and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is lodged in the bone, then you should invent an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed under the chin the tool that serves to extract; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
And it is similar to the cavity of which this is the concave part; and its size should be according to what you need from it, depending on the largeness or smallness of the bone.
But its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound that you have cut when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure to avoid pus, then you sew together the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
And if the opening is small, or you fear that pus will form, then fill the wound with cloth and wool according to the size of the incision.
And if an inflamed pus forms, then infuse cloth in vinegar, oil, and wine, and place it on top of the wound.
And ensure that the splint is not too tightly placed on the broken bone; therefore, you must check the patient every day, because when the bandage becomes soft or the splint starts to slip, then you should adjust it and tighten the bandage again.
And now place the patient's pillow under their neck, and put a small cushion under their head at night; this way, the helper beside them will have an easier time raising their arm from that side, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated with the muscle; or tie the patient's arm to their neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless you notice in that place more prominence or abscess within twelve days.
And promptly renew the bandage if you see it turning red, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, leaving until the fracture of the clavicle is restored and healed.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in a few months of that time.
Chapter VI
On the healing of a shoulder fracture.
The text appears to describe a medical procedure involving the use of a tool called a "spatula." Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
And so when the site of the break — and it is broken in the middle part of the body — and is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, forcefully prepare him and reduce it according to the natural form in every manner of skill that is possible for you.
Then place on the site powder of crushed eggshells mixed with oil and let it sit; then place a double-layered cloth pad; then place on him a thin wooden board according to the size of the spatula, either entirely or slightly more.
But if the board is concave in some of the places of the splint, then you fill that concavity with a pad, and then place the board again according to equality.
Then strengthen on top with a long bandage, binding it tightly and firmly securing the board so that it is not moved from its place.
And examine the bandage every day; and each time that it is softened, bind another layer and strengthen and straighten the board if it has moved from its place.
And lie the patient on his side.
And the splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And therefore, when this number is completed, you should dissolve the bandage, knowing that it is safe because this belongs to the bones whose beginning and dissolution are not feared.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone pressing and put a rope underneath it, then you should cut over it, remove it, and act according to what we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula, taking care to avoid an abscess if it occurs here.
### Chapter VII
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this delays; but its ends move because they are splintered and fragmented.
And the consequences of this when it breaks in the middle are that it declines into the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation. мени
And its restoration is achieved by having the patient lie on their back and placing a cushion between their shoulders; then press the muscles together and align the ribs with the hands of two assistants; be skillful in your operation and in the alignment according to all possible ways that are convenient for this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the pattern of the previous translation and my understanding of similar languages, here's a line-by-line translation:
"Chapter VIII.
"About the restoration of ribs when they are dislocated.
"Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large areas near the back; and at their ends towards the front, this condition does not happen except because they are cartilaginous. "And the recognition of it is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about it with words.
"And the restoration should be done so that you align the fracture with words according to the possible method, until it is absorbed as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a splint, if necessary.
"And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards the inner parts, then severe pain and stabbing occur for the patient, like the stabbing that occurs in those with pleurisy, and this happens because the bone pierces the membrane; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur; and this is difficult to cure.
"And already the ancient physicians have described it with ingenious words.
"And they said: it is necessary to place food for the patient that causes flatulence and bloating, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards towards the outer parts.
But we would have done this to prevent the light cause of forming an abscess, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it helps in this situation.
And some of them say that it should be placed on top of the bladder and squeezed with force; and this seems reasonable, but there is fear that the bladder will attract excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
And some of them say: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool already soaked in cautious oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is equal when you wrap it according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a poultice of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences intense constriction that they cannot tolerate, and the bones are striking the membrane with a puncture, then it is feared for the patient. In this case, we must cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place an instrument over it to preserve the breath, as mentioned before. Then, we should gently incise the bone and extract it.
And then we should join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should take and pour powder into rose oil and place it on the area, and the patient should be treated with water appropriate for the internal abscess.
And let him be placed on his back on the bed where he sleeps, until he is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of a spine fracture in the back and neck.
Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and later it extends to their cartilage, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider this: if you see that his hands are already softened and numbed and dead, and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them, and when you squeeze those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then know that it is not healing, and in the same way it is fatal.
And if he moves those and feels constriction with the fingers and pricking, then know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
If you see that the vertebrae of the neck appear like this and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, do to them what has happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he will have flatulence and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is turned on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and at that point do not work on his cure.
But if none of these causes occur, the condition is better and easier to treat.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce to drain the abscess cautiously, and place over the affected vertebra olive oil mixed with only a little sunflower oil; place this on there several times during the day until the abscess is drained.
Then place a comforting and soothing plaster, and strengthen it with bandages; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if there is separation of the bone (as in dislocation) or any other cause that has already detached from it, then it is necessary to cut along the spine and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then treat it with some ointment until it heals.
Here is the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if you feel bones broken in the patient, then you should open that area, remove the splintered bone fragments, and treat the wound with the prescribed remedy until it heals.
Chapter X
On the restoration of the eyes.
The bones of the eyes are often broken, and if they break, the fracture occurs at their ends and extends along their length, bending towards the inside; this causes pain in the affected area and a stabbing sensation, and the leg becomes numb when it is broken.
And the treatment for this is that you should extend your hand over the area until it covers the break, matching its shape.
And if the break is only at the end of it, then you should envelop that part according to what appears to you by reasonable judgment, wrapping it until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the break is in the length or has already bent towards the inside, then you should have the patient lie on their back until you are ready to restore that break. And then, when you have wrapped it, place a poultice on top of it, and then place a board or plank over it, securing it firmly with bandages so that you do not fear the splintering of the break or the dislodging of the board.
And moisten the cavity with water that fills it until it reaches the narrowest point according to its shape, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
But if an abscess is found, then cease from stretching the patient and from their restoration until the abscess is settled, and place water on it to soothe according to what was previously said; then return to the patient's restoration, and strengthen them as needed.
And if there are shards or fractures in the bones, then treat them accordingly.
Chapter Eleven
On the restoration of a fractured elbow.
The elbow is that which is between the shoulder and the head.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways. The first is that you take a thick stick of medium length like this:
And at both ends there are ligaments attached, and then it is suspended from an elevated place.
Then the patient should sit on a stool, and then they should throw out their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the middle part of the stick where the curve is located.
Certainly! Here's the translation of the given text into English:
Here is the translation of the sentence:
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with one bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends it in their respective parts.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then half of the bandage should be placed above the knee, and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that area and over the elbow itself.
Wrap it with ease and without difficulty, and once wrapped according to what is needed and in a good manner, then strengthen it so that an abscess does not form.
However, if an abscess does form, then leave the bandage in place for seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening it is that you place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth bandage around the poultice; and then fix the arm on that support, and place your open hand over its muscle.
Here is a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
And then use of straw (or hay).
And you must place on the fracture that straw which is broader and stronger than the others; and place between each straw the width of a finger, and let the length of the straws be according to the break with an addition of three fingers' breadth in total.
And then strengthen over the straws with the binding I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the longer the fracture, the narrower the binding should be.
And then, if you see the arrangement of the straws and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the binding and the straws in place for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the binding in all parts for three days so that swelling or inflammation does not occur in the place, or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the excess of tightness of the binding; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not loosen the binding until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be upon their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
And place a cooked pillow full of wool upon it, and in every hour of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken member is not dissolved or weakened, and that the bandage is softened; therefore, correct this with all your skill.
And place the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until it begins to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food of the patient heavier.
For it is customary for the adjutor and the thigh to be strengthened in forty days; and then it is necessary that they are loosened, and a bath is administered, and the area is treated with ointments that correct this condition.
And if the fracture is shallow, then you should not loosen from it the bandage and splints for fifteen days or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two forearms; one of these is small and is that which is called the thumb, and the other is large and is placed below the small bone, on the lower side.
And if only the large fireplace or the small one is broken and they are both shattered together.
And when the small fireplace is broken above, its repair will be easy, and its healing will be easier still.
And when the lower part of the fireplace is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the small fireplace above, it is fitting for the doctor to make a small incision with ease until it is healed.
But if the large fireplace is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous incision.
And if both fireplaces are broken together, then you must make the incision much stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand for its repair and extend the incision over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be on top, as well as all the other things mentioned, and the auricular vein should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a fallen chair.  />
And there should be a cushion in front of him on the bed or bed frame, so that the patient does not fall.
And immediately the assistant should extend the patient's arm on the side that is lower with his hand or a bandage, and another assistant should do the same above.
And immediately the doctor should envelop the bones so that they are reduced to their best shape possible.
And if there is a fracture of the bone, then you should reduce all the pieces in their place with your skill.
And if it appears to you that the fracture is separated and you are not confident in its restoration, then you should make an incision on it and perform it according to the method we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already written about that in a separate chapter, so take care of it according to that.
And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with oil and white wax ointment, and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, and wrap a strong cloth around it with fine stitches until the abscess subsides; then remove the ointment and place a prepared poultice made from powdered myrobalan and egg whites on it; and immediately place irons; and let the iron that is placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the name of the stars on the arm can be seen in the major dispositions, whether it is a fracture in one finger or in two fingers at once.
And then place your bandage on the site of the fracture as strongly and as vehemently as possible. And when the bandage will be closer to the upper parts of the fracture or the lower parts, place the bandage a little wetter, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths with which you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread used to tie it should be medium in thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have advised.
And examine the member and the bandage after some days. And if something happens that requires a correction, as soon as it occurs to the member, then it is necessary for you to soak the member in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the member unbound until it rests, and then return the bandage.
And if the bandage is softened and the bone is healed and looks like this, then correct everything with your skill.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
If nothing occurs to the patient from those causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary for him to be released before about 20 days or thereabouts.
Then the patient's hand should be suspended by its ability to move, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very lightly it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the disposition of the nature.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of a finger or toe fracture.
Know that in the fingers and toes, fractures are delayed, and only happen rarely.
And when there is a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then the patient should lie on his back and before him place a cushion according to necessity, and then place the patient's hand on it extended outward.
Then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should bind them together until they are well joined with a good join.
And then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, unless an abscess forms; and then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Based on the pattern and context from the previous translation, let's translate the given sentence:
And let there be a sheet or cloth with which to lift the body, so that it may be applied to the palm of the hand; strengthen it as needed.
But if the fracture is in the separated parts on the outside, then place one cloth above and another cloth below the separation on the palm, so that the hand may be open and straight; and then place the strap, just as the hand is turned to a right angle between the two with bandages.
And if there is a fracture in any of the phalanges of the aforementioned [fingers], then if it is the distal phalanx, let it be splinted as needed and strengthened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight bandage on it so that the fracture may be elevated and not worsened.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then let it be splinted and bound with its own finger, or all of them may be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small bandage on top, just as we have said for the distal phalanx.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the arrangement of a cautious and opposed apostema — with your operation — according to what is needed when any of those causes occur, as has been repeatedly stated about it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture in the bone of the thigh.
The thighbone is often broken and becomes apparent to the touch when it splits into two parts, one above the other.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the bandage is tied above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on his stomach and face.
And then the attendant extends all the bandages to their respective parts according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is near the head of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the knee at the patellar part, so that the extension goes upward, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be made close to the knee, and the extension to the lower parts.
And then the physician joins the bones with both hands until he reduces it according to its natural appearance and the bone is united by a good union; then it is necessary to place a poultice and tight bandages, lest an abscess occur in the limb. If an abscess occurs in the patient, then leave it for some days until the abscess is fully formed, and then return to your treatment.
The stricture of the patient should be done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess material; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh bone.
Insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the bone, and let the ends of the thread protrude from the higher part of both sides; then wrap around the leg and thigh the excess material from the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the area of that fracture some splints, and from those place a splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
And then begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, your bandage should be lighter and moister.
This line appears to describe a medical procedure involving the ligaments or tendons of the foot and their connection to other parts of the body. Here's a possible translation:
Sure, here's the translation:
Based on the given sentence and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is so severe that even splints cannot be applied to it, as we have said in the arm and shoulder.
However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, no limping occurs; and if it is restored alone, or another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one who is always lame should limp.
And know that the thigh is strong in 40 days, or a little more, or a little less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Know that a fracture of the knee joint happens rarely, but it occurs frequently due to twisting.
However, if the fracture occurs, then it is not more than a crack or hole in its parts, with or without damage, and everything is dependent on sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts should be made equal with those mentioned until it is joined and united as much as possible by means of balance, ease, and skill.
And then place a plaster and place it on that round area if you need to use it; strengthen it with a strap on top as appropriate.
And then consider all the precautions that we have recommended for other fractures, similarly as it is done with abscesses and similar situations, so that one prepares for any mishap with what is appropriate for him until he is healed.
### Chapter XVI
### About the Restoration of a Fractured Thigh
Know that in the thigh there are two bones: one is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And as it happens with the different types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, so too is the restoration of it like the restoration of the arm, and its operation is the same.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, the thigh becomes completely disjointed.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh becomes partially disjointed in the front.
And if the larger bone is broken, it causes an outward displacement, which are conditions not familiar to you.
And now administer extension, traction, and ligature of the tendons according to that same principle.
However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture has many fragments, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your skill.
And in the case of an operation on the thigh, and when you straighten the tendons and complete all the necessary operations, then take wooden splints which are placed below the sole, made similarly to palm branches; choose those with a small thickness and not from the hands, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and insert one at the bottom.
Then wrap each splint in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one at the top of the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them extend from the bottom to just below the foot.
Then tie the two splints in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains stable.
And a splint of wood has already been administered according to the length of the leg, and it has been placed on the patient's leg so that they may remain still.
And it is especially important that you do this in cases of fracture, and when the injury is severe.
And every day consider the leg and study it closely, and you should guard against swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then attend to the patient with what is necessary until they are healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not often suffer complete fractures; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not suffer anything more than bruising in most cases.
And if the bones of the foot should suffer a fracture and those bones are raised above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were walking.
Then place the other foot on top of the raised bones, and press down on them, and squeeze until they return to their proper places.
And then place an emplastrum and wool on top of it, and place beneath the sole of the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen it with the foot in a straight position, as you have wrapped it with cloth and other bandages that are needed.
And when three or four days have passed with them, then you unbind the bandage, for you will find the bones joined together, either firmly attached or dislocated, and the operation on those is as follows:
But if some are dislocated, then restore those and join them as I have instructed you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place on the dislocated toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider than it; and then place under the foot this board that has been recommended to you, and strengthen it with a proper bandage.
But if what is dislocated among the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each toe a splint of its corresponding size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the lowest part of the foot, and let one of the surfaces of the board be under the sole of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is fitting that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents which we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII
On the Fracture of a Woman's Pubic Bone, the Penis Bone, and a Man's Member
When the woman's pubic bone is broken, make her sit in a low chair, and then incline her slightly backward, and hold her from behind.
And then the midwife should fill the pubic bone with cotton, and it should be done in her pubic bone as shown; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, because everything is forgotten until the fracture returns to its place before the bone, as shown.
And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, and then she will urinate, and return it and bring it back in the manner in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will have healed.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place over its opening a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into his anus, and next, blow through the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated inside the anus, for the fracture will return.
And let it be filled with cotton and left there for some days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and fixation that which we have recommended for the hip bone.
And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and rarely happens, especially to those who have some learning and practice and understand this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions in the correct pathway for restoration and stricture of it, and thus understand well.
But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take a sheath of goatskin, and insert the penis into it; then place over it a bandage of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and then leave it alone for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On restoring fractures of the bones when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for someone who experiences a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or shinbone, or similar to that, that you bloodlet them immediately if the conditions of bloodletting are favorable or testify thus as we have said above.
And if the wound is bleeding, then you should restrain it by sprinkling powdered dry wine on it, unless there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess develops.
But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause harmful accidents to happen.
But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed above the skin, then you must make an effort to reduce it and level it with your hands with ease and minimal force.
This text appears to be discussing the treatment of a medical condition, possibly a dislocation or fracture. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And let there be a return [to the previous state], and in him there should be little roughness so that he is not doubled. You must have the comprehension of this at the time of the operation.
And let there be an acute extremity to which there is an edge in its extremities; and let it be above him, tending towards roughness, and from the greater part of him to the divided parts.
And this is his form:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means "little shovel".
Because it is necessary that the tip of the pointed instrument be placed elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
And press down on it once until the bone returns and is equalized with some liquid.
And so you must strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them. And if the broken extremity is delicate and does not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary that you insert the tip of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then insert it with what is suitable for it from among the instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
And next, scrape off what remains on the bones of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reduced and afterwards the patient finds a very intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do this which you will confer great benefit on the patient.
When you have completed the restoration that you do on the bone, and then submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation or corruption in it.
And then administer steels at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, and let the wound remain uncovered so that you may incise the flesh with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or severe illness on their patients, which is unhealthy. And if there is slight swelling, soften it, unlike the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad and you fear that worse accidents may occur, as we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then it is not suitable to place cushions on that spot, but rather make an envelope of hard cloths instead of cushions and strengthen them with those.
And when the wound has already begun to heal after one or two days, and it has generated a scab, then remove from above the cloth that you had placed over it with caution, and administer calves (ointments), such as those we commonly use for treating wounds, like tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus runs away from it easily to the lower parts.
If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor has a scab formed, then know that here are the signs of smallpox, for which you should probe the wound with a lancet. And of those signs, those that are separate and extracted, those that are not separated and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you must cut open according to what is possible for you.
"And if it happens that the wound is festering or has developed gangrene, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply to each one of these [wounds] water suitable for the treatment as described in the preceding chapter.
"And concerning that matter which I will discuss and you should apply your attention to: when the bone is broken, it should protrude from the member like the bones of the hip or shoulder, similar to those of large members; do not attempt to set it or extract it because many times death occurs due to this; leave it alone so that it can drain, because usually it will fall off on its own within 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it alone.
"Chapter 20
"On the treatment of nodes [swellings] that occur in the wake of a fracture.
"This swelling often occurs in the wake of a bone fracture, especially around the joints, and it takes on the shape of the member; and it greatly hinders the member from its natural function.
Based on the provided translation style and the medieval medical context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And let there be no extraction of that [something] for several days; and then release it and repeat the process, until the swelling is reduced; or apply pressure on that lead sheet firmly, because lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into stone and is tight, and it is necessary to remove it promptly, then cut it through its highest part, and slice off the excess and prominent parts, or rasp it with sharp rasps until it is reduced; and care for that area until it is healed.
### Chapter XXI.
### Restoration of Fractures When Restored, and Then the Member Remains Subtle and Fragile According to Its Nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member remains subtle and fragile, this happens only for several reasons: one of which is the excessive dissolution of the ligament and its bonding, not done as needed; or due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member; or due to excessive superfluous wrapping; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make their heart tender until their blood is replenished; administer a bath; and intermix joy and happiness upon them.
Then place a weight on the member, so that the weight draws to it the necessary nutrition, or continue to wash it with warm water until the nourishment flows and the body returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII
Of the treatment of dislocated bones, when they are restored crookedly and the operation is forbidden from doing this:
When it happens to the member already restored that its healing from crookedness and prominence of the bone is prevented by a defect in the form of the member, yet nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of one who thinks that the member has been newly dislocated.
However, there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is deathly.
But if the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be washed with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of mullein and root of madder, and melilot, and similar to those; and a plaster should be made for them with a well-made softening ointment; or let there be taken mucilage of madder root and mixed with egg white or oil of sweet almonds, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be taken and crushed with juice of pomegranate, and similar to those from the medicines which are named emollient and consolidating.
And sometimes it is resolved with gentle and continuous rubbing that should be done with wet hands, and the member's movement should be administered at all times of the day.
But if the curvature has already progressed and is severe, turning into stone, and a cure with iron becomes necessary, then it is appropriate that the bone be cut above the deformity, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and any excess from the node of that same bone should be removed with fine scissors, and ease should be administered to the patient with care and diligence.
Chapter 23.
About the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the member, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately perforate and reduce it, without delay, because if it is delayed, the area becomes swollen and very difficult to reduce the dislocation with water.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stretch the area during the swelling, because many views cause spasm and intense pain.
When this occurs, it is necessary that you resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and then allow the abscess to rest; and then wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it gently.
And let all the members be treated with that which reminds them of their place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation following what was stated about fractures; from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of lower jaw dislocation.
Both jaws can be dislocated; if not treated in time, the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places by a slight movement and are softened a little, or they are completely dislocated until they are softened at the joint, to the point where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its place.
But when the dislocation is slight, it returns by itself with little treatment.
"However, if the dislocation is complete and total, then it should be gently reduced right away, and not delayed at all.
"And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his thumbs into the mouth of the patient on each side of the dislocated jawbone, if the dislocation is one-sided; or let him insert both thumbs together, if the dislocation is two-sided, and with the rest of his hands let him support the outside of the patient's jawbones to equalize them. And he should command the patient to cease moving their jaws and allow them to return to their proper place; and the doctor should adjust the jawbone and help it return to its original position.
"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer steam with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, and do not delay the reduction of both any longer, as we have said.
"And when they return and are aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place a compress of cloth with wax and oil over those areas, and it should be made of wax and fine oil; and then bind them gently with soft bandages.
And let the sleep of the patient be on their back, and their head be placed between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything; when their food is ready, only then should they eat whatever they want.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking or speaking until the jaw is healed and closed.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws in some time is not converted to their places, then frequent fevers and continuous sweating occur, and quickly inflate the patient's belly, and quickly they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and most often, those who experience this die within ten days.
### Chapter 25:
On the reduction of the displacement of the furculum and the end of the muscle.
The furculum is not displaced from the interior of the chest due to its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is displaced to the exterior part, which can be detected by feeling.
And the recovery of the patient is that he lies on his back and extends his arms. And then you close the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then place on that plaster some powder and strengthen it.
But the extremity that is the elbow and is continuous with it is not dislocated in any way; therefore, it must be reduced and immobilized as we have said and according to what you are able to do.
And then place on that plaster some powder, and stricture, and command the patient to keep quiet and at rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it has been separated from its place.
Chapter .26.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the titilli to the humerus.  (Note: The text says "titillic" but I assume it should be "titilli", referring to a part of the scapula)
And the second is that it is dislocated at the junction above the humerus, and this is done late; and it is not dislocated at the junctions behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the junctions in front of the nerves.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if a strong blow strikes some men by striking or falling, and their muscles are swollen with a hard swelling, it is suspected that this may be due to dislocation.
Then it is necessary for you to explore this inside before being certain of it, and then proceed with the treatment of him.
And the dislocation is known when, after tickling it in the affected areas, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find a clear difference between them; and you find concavity at the head of the muscle, and after tickling you feel the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it completely.
If it is dislocated, you should place your feet or hands on it, and then you will find a clear touch that is not hidden.
And this dislocation can be reduced lightly when it is recent and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the affected area; then places his fingers below the ticklish spot and lifts the joint with strength back to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it outwards; then places it below so that it returns gently.
If the previously mentioned method does not work and the dislocation occurs as it did at first, then after several days, the patient should be bathed in hot water and an emollient ointment should be administered, one that softens and loosens like altea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
Then the patient should be laid on their back and placed on a small pillow made of wool that is well-balanced between firmness and softness. The doctor should place his heel on the pillow, raise the head of the muscle with all his strength, pull the patient's hand to prevent it from being drawn away, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not drawn away, for this will soon return to its place.
And if you wish to do it in this manner: you should have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on the opposite side of the dislocation. He should insert his arm under the pillow of the patient and lift the pillow until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant should pull the patient's hand away from their stomach. If the patient is light, then it is necessary that with another person he be suspended, so that gravity can help, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another manner: and that is to place on the ground a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place cushions under the patient; since cloths are placed on top of the pole's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended towards the other part, and his body is stretched out with force on the other side, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that is to take a pole whose length is two arms long, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness should be less at the top according to this form:
And then place cushions on the round head of the pole so that it does not hurt the patient.
Then place cushions under the patient's chin, and stretch his hand or arm on the pole to the sides, and bind the pole over the shoulders, arms, and the end of his hand.
Approach the patient's arms and place them on a ladder according to their length, with one hand extended towards the sides, and the other side suspended from the other part, because the joint will soon enter.
Once the patient's treatment is completed according to each possible method, it is necessary for you to place a small pillow of wool under their shoulders; and then apply a plaster made from powdered myrobalan with egg white over all the muscles, so that it covers them completely; and then tighten the pillow firmly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck, and left undisturbed, and the patient's hand should not be moved for seven days.
It is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is lighter on their healing.
And then the food should be given more abundantly, especially around day seven or five, and exercise some movement; and thus if it is firmly set and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to them or for any other cause, then it is necessary to administer a pointed cautery with three holes, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all of this is done and after approximately seven days the bandage and joint are not immobile, and the compress and tightness are reduced over them several times, and it is still not immobile and also cannot raise that arm to its original position, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation that is made in the feet and the chest or back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension by hand until it returns to its place.
And another tight bandage should be applied, and care for it until it heals.
And if it happens that the healing is heavy on the limb and there is delay in its movement, then let the patient use hot baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the treatment for shoulder dislocation.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but most often towards the front or the back. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden from you because it either drops below the sight or touch depending on which direction it is dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, this is clearly indicated to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you cut and reduce the dislocation quickly before it becomes an abscess, because if it turns into an abscess, it is difficult to reduce, and hardly heals completely; especially when it is in the shoulder blade area, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and more painful, and many people die from that.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the elbow and below him, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers at once, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the anterior shoulder area, then return it by bending the hand with his own hand, until he strikes the elbow with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer very strong extension and much force.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in the same way by two assistants so that it is not removed before the extension.
And then you should gently turn his arm in every direction because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around his hand or a bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this will assist in the lubrication of the joint; and then he should push the joint vigorously until it returns to its place.
And then, after the reduction of it, it is necessary that he be placed on a plaster in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be tightly bound, and his arm should be suspended from the neck, and let it rest for some days.
And then he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should untie his bandage and leave it thus.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you should repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is tightened; and then unbind it.
But if seriousness occurs after the reduction of the joint, and his condition is in movement, then administer moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression until he is relieved; or place on the joint poultices, which are made from thick dough; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. Sure, let's break down this sentence: "When bathing, it should be done until it is clean.
"And if you wish, place a piece of moist and scraped cowhide over the wound, and bind it tightly; do this several times, because this makes it moist and reduces it to its proper state.
"Chapter 28.
"Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
"Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and reducing this dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important to be quick in reducing it within the hour of its dislocation, before the area becomes swollen or a swelling appears.
"The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand, while the physician places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its place.
"However, it is important to consider if the palm has already been dislocated towards the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table and extend and reduce it; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a plaster to draw out the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you cannot endure or survive the reduction of the pus that passes through the day.
But still the joint remains according to its twisting nature; and do not tell the patient any cause, except that their hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or twisted, and in this case, do nothing for them except to strengthen it with a cautery near its seat and give them something strong.
Therefore, when the swelling has returned, then place on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and after that, let it be released and let it be left, and exercise their hand.
But if the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then soften that area with hot water and some friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in all parts.
And when one of these fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then straighten the finger and push the dislocation out with your thumbs until it returns to its normal position.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated for two days.
Then suspend the finger and stretch it until it is straight in its socket by the next day.
And at night when you sleep, bind the finger as described, and do not stop unbinding it during the day to exercise with movement, and bind it again at night; continue doing this for a few days until it is straight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and bind it to that place and perform the first operation again with your thumb until it is healed.
Similarly, do the same thing when it is dislocated in other places.
Chapter 30
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine in the back.
When a complete dislocation of any of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs, and many vertebrae are moved from their place, then in that case there is no cure, because death will come to the patient.
The first source sentence translates to:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"However, the treatment for this is to first consider if the jaundice occurs in infancy, because then there is neither a cure nor healing from it at all.
"However, regarding those that come from a blow or a bruise or something similar to those, the ancients have already spoken about the treatments with elaborate discourse, of which the most useful returns; but I have already shortened it because the least escapes from excess, for my proximity to my own opinion in this exposition, with which I have explained and formatted it here using various instruments of that with which I will show and explain it.
"And only those are cured which occur in the back specifically with what I recommend.
"And the patient should be laid on their back near a wall, and a wet cloth should be placed beneath them to prevent their feet from becoming cold.
"And then a straight stick should be placed upright in the ground at the head of the patient, and another stick at the foot of the bed on the other side.
Here is a possible translation of the given text:
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
And then each servant should extend the bandage to the base of the beam, and ensure that the two beams and their respective bandages are not moved from their places, but rather secured as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms firmly on the spine until it returns to its proper position, or alternatively, place his hands on a board and then adjust his feet on the board until it returns.
But if it does not return with this method, then take a board whose length or width is approximately three spans, and make an opening in the wall near the patient so that one end of the board can be inserted into it. Then place the middle of the board on the spine, and the doctor should put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, turn the patient over with your hand, and lay him on the ground so that his head is between two beams whose length is one arm's length each, and also place his head between two uprights; let the distance between each beam be one palm's width, and then make a hole in each beam into which a rope can be threaded, and secure each beam firmly to the ground so that it cannot be moved.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And at the patient's extremity is a hole in which the bone has formed, the length of which is one handspan and it is curved; and in the other two bones there is something similar to that.
Then tighten the straps that you have tied on the patient's feet around the hole that is nearest to their head, and the straps that you have tied on their hips around the turn that is nearest to their feet.
Then there should be one assistant at each turn, who turns the patient with their hands, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
And then, after the spine has been straightened and the area has been smoothed out, you should apply a desiccating poultice with egg white, and then wool; and then place on top of the poultice a wooden board whose width is three fingers or about that, and whose length covers the area of the hump, and on top of the spinal curve.
Then bind it with the strap that we mentioned earlier, and feed the patient with fine food until they are healed.
And if there remains any prominence in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth with a long-term regimen of the diet that we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
And sometimes it happens that there is pressure on the last of the spine's vertebrae, and it is believed that this is due to displacement; and that bone is the one that if moved, it should not be approached with this medicine, because it will cause death.
Capítulo .XXXI. (Translation: Chapter .31)
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be considered as a dislocation, and not what happens to other small joints with slight displacement and cavity.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, because it can be dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
The sign of dislocation inward is that when you place the healthy leg next to the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the joint is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their affected foot towards their shin, and the area of the swelling is hot, indicating that the head of the femur has reached there.
The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation is that their limbs are displaced outward, and the accidents of this condition are contrary to normal conditions.
The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation at the front is that their leg extends according to its usual course, but it cannot be bent without pain in the joint, and if they try to walk, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained and their groin is swollen, and you should make them walk on their heels.
The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation at the back is that they cannot extend their joint nor can they bend it as much as usual; and their leg is shorter than the other, and their groin is softened, and the head of the thighbone should be placed in its proper location.
However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you must consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If it has already become settled in its current position, then you should not attempt to reduce it, as this is not within your power; and in such cases, it is unnecessary to be impetuous.
The text you've provided is likely in Old Occitan, a Romance language that was spoken in southern France during the Middle Ages and had significant influence on the development of modern French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. Here’s a line-by-line translation into English:
Sure, I'd be happy to help with that translation. Here it goes line by line:
And if it is an extension of him or of the part from inside to the elbow towards the part of the collarbone, or from behind to the part of the back.
And let this extension be done with all of them at once until the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then all kinds of things must be done for the specific cure.
In the reduction of him, when he is dislocated and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back with his arms raised; and then place the bandages over the top of the shoulder in that place which is between the head of the humerus and the lower part of the shoulder; and then extend the bandage from above the elbow to the highest part of the clavicle.
And then another strong assistant should take the patient's arms and press firmly on the injured shoulder, extending them outward with great force, for this will return it to its place.
And this type of treatment is lighter in care with which this member is reduced than other types of treatments.
But if you are excused and do not comply with this type of treatment completely, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligament on both heels and ankles.
And let the length of each be four times as much, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by two times.
And then have the patient hang over the top of a pole, with their head upwards; and let the length of them from the ground be two arm-lengths.
And then command a strong youth to lower the head of the cushion, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth, using his strength, pushes the cushion downwards, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation that has moved outwards, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended when they were swollen; and let the ligament be strongly tied around the affected leg specifically and around their feet.
And appropriately, two poles should be placed, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and similarly, poles adjusted in the middle of the bed should be placed, upon which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, because you need to extend the distance to the parts below so that it is not pulled.
And each assistant should stretch out on their respective side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the thigh be slightly extended and according to this same account on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's elbow, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that traction he places that extended down below at the place of the shoulder.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended down below and be raised off the ground; rather, it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as we said about the elevation if his shoulder is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about his positioning over two shoulders; and it should be on his face with the arms extended, as we have mentioned.
And it is necessary that a compression be applied with a board onto the location where there is the joint.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those jaws and the patient extends his leg and expands it without hesitation, then you know that the member has returned to its proper place — at this point, you prepare two cushions and apply a poultice and bind tightly with a bandage so that the swelling is not increased in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
At this point, if you see those jaws in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation has been secured, and therefore allow the patient to go.
And if you see any sign of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to it, and bind it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
Then remove that, and have the patient walk on both legs for several days, until he is comfortable.
**Chapter 32.**
Of the cure for dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated towards the outside, or towards the inside, and more often towards the back; it cannot be dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his thigh to his hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he can extend his thigh if possible; adhere your back to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then have another person adhere their hand to the shoulder, and hold those hands firmly over the shoulder with strength. Another servant should stretch out his leg until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that the thigh adheres effortlessly to the hip.
Then bandage it and have the thigh adhere to the hip, and then bind both together with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for some days until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is difficult, then administer strong extension with the ointments that have been previously mentioned in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Treatment of Talus Dislocation
The talus sometimes is displaced by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the direction, and its dislocation occurs either in the inner parts or in the outer parts.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the talus swelling towards the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its displacement is a simple reduction, which is to be extended with ease using the hands and then wrapped until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the direction, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and let him have a strong and courageous servant behind his back in the middle of him.
And then you take with your right hand the foot from the upper part, and with your left hand the lower part of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand for two times, and then extend it with the left; and lift the feet of the foot with the right behind the thigh without effort.
And do this two times as we have counted.
Then lift the feet of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one time or two in this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and if not, then on him you repeat the operation, because that returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and secure a large rope firmly to the ground, and it should fit between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that the patient does not get hurt.
Then another servant should hold the patient's thighs, and then another servant should extend the foot with his hands or with a rope that lies on the foot's neck; and then each servant should stretch against the extension of their partner, and the rope should be stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body is not pulled towards the parts behind its extension.
And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy part at its original place, for the dislocation tends to return easily.
And when the dislocation has returned and you are assured of its reduction, then place a plaster and bind it strongly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you should be careful or watch out for the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not press on them forcefully.
And then let it be for two or three days; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days. But if it is necessary for him to walk before that time, there is no certainty that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it may not receive healing.
And if an abscess happens to occur, then you should administer in the opening of it that which was mentioned earlier in our account, in another section on treatments and applications, until it is removed.
The text begins with "Capitol .xxxiiii.", which translates to "Chapter XXXIV" in English. This indicates that the following passage is part of a larger work divided into chapters or sections.
"About the treatment of foot dislocation.
"It is advisable that the one who is dislocated be wrapped with a cloth of moderate length without effort; and this should not be difficult, rather it is easier.
"But if the dislocation is in some of the toes at the back of the foot, then it is advisable to have the patient sit on a firm surface such as the ground or a table, and be positioned as if walking.
"And then you stand on the patient's feet, and place your foot on top of what appears to be the joint, and then step on it with all your weight until it returns, and you see that it is now wrapped and does not appear swollen.
"And then place under the sole of their foot a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm bandage for three days; and then release it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and healing is ensured." ️
"Chapter XXXV
"About the types of dislocation that occur with a wound, or with a fracture, or with both.
When some cause of those occurs and you endeavor in the treatment of that and in the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
And for this, it is not necessary to assume responsibility over the patient's care, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of treatment only medicines that cautiously suppress inflammation, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for the one from whom you hope for salvation from danger, along with alleviation of illness, and in which some hope appears. And so, strive at once to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a careful abscess.
And so if the member returns as desired, then administer a regimen that carefully suppresses the abscess and treats the wound with suitable dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the sutures of the bone are separated, then you puncture their marrow, and do as we said in the simple diseases, in the places mentioned above.
And guard and avoid as best you can that which is evil in the paths of fear, as my teaching has preceded you; for this is better for you, you should honor your Creator, and it will be more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time. Sure! Let's break down the text into parts and then translate it line by line: **Translation:** Amen.
