O, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, and its completion has achieved its purpose, and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a section of the operation by hand, which is surgery.
For the operation by hand is suppressed in our region and in our time, it has been greatly neglected, and its knowledge has been lost; only a few descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed many [things] and have come to errors and confusion, so that their intentions are closed and its strength and art are lengthened.
And it seems to me that I should revive [the operation by hand] with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it may come in the form of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of clarification, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, which counts Galen among those who knew the position of the members and their forms, and their connection and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and sinews, and their number, and their arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and the still ones, and the places of their outlet.
And for this, Hippocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in the work little, and mainly in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of that in the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will fall into error by which many people die, as I have seen happen too often. For some are educated in this science and then disregard it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an apostema scrophulous on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that a great amount of blood flowed out until the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who was in a bad state, and the stone was large. He tried to pull out that stone with a piece of the bladder, which caused that man to die on the third day.
And I had been called to remove that stone, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then release him according to his desires, and then bind him again, and let him lie dry for some days, and command that we untie the bandage; and thus enter until the space and the foot were inflamed, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the bandage, and then calmness was achieved and thus he admitted his pains.
However, corruption had already taken hold in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was greatly magnified in him.
The cause of which is that the cancerous tumor is full of melancholic humor, so it is not necessary for it to be cut out entirely, but only enough to be hosted by the member in its entirety.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which the greatest danger lies.
And I have already mentioned this in every part of this book where an operation occurs that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and your patients with joy and firmness.
And use the best method through the grace of God to achieve healing and praiseworthy success, and abandon the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and keep your weapons away from what makes you afraid, so that reliance on your faith and your name does not escape you: for greater is your glory, both in this world and forever after your holiness.
France has already been dissected in some of its monasteries: "Do not treat evil patients, lest you be called evil doctors.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and firstly of the first part. The first chapter is about the head, particularly concerning the shapes of instruments and the irons of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter on incisions and punctures, as well as cupping therapy, pustules, extraction of arrows and similar matters, all categorized and organized according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter organized from head to toe, including the forms of instruments.
It should be noted that I will explain the qualities of the preparations for this cautery and its contraindications, as well as in which complexity it is prohibited to cauterize.  (A more natural translation might be: "I want to discuss the qualities of the preparations for this cautery and its contraindications, as well as the conditions under which cauterization is prohibited.")
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the preparations for cautery and its contraindications is a long and detailed discourse, subtle in science and secretly hidden; and many wise men have already spoken about it, disagreeing among themselves. For me to repeat all their discourses would be too lengthy.
And therefore I say that you should apply cautery universally to any condition with or without matter, except for two conditions which are called cold conditions without matter.
In a cold and dry condition with matter, you will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, while others say the opposite about it, that cautery is not suitable for an illness caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a cold and dry illness with water that is hot and dry be healed.
And I disagree with those who say the opposite about this, that by cautery every cold and dry illness that occurs in the body of men is helped; for when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be cold.
And I say by this reasoning that experience has already shown me many times.
However, it is not necessary to dwell on this matter which has already been proven and practiced in the chapter on cautery by previous practice, and he knows the diversity of human conditions and the nature of illnesses within them, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span for them.
In other cases, there is no need to worry about it, especially in damp and cold ailments, because all doctors agree on this, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery for these.
And know, children, that concerning the secret of healing through fire and its goodness, it is agreed upon to use burning cautery in medicine, because fire is simple and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and not other adjacent members except for slight harm.
However, the action of medicine applied through burning spreads to adjacent members, and it quickly brings healing to the sick member that is difficult to heal and quickly helps.
But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this except for superfluities. And it is known to us through experience and long years of service in studying the art, concerning the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from lengthy discourse. And if it were not that my book is not read here, I would have hidden a secret with fire and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels sicknesses, with philosophical demonstrative discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is appropriate to make a cautery and they consider the best time to be spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at any time, because the harm caused by the unfortunate circumstance of time is submerged in the benefit that comes from applying the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for painful or necessary pains, such as fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest something worse should happen.
And this should not be in your thoughts, O children, because only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, as if to say that the ailment which is cured by cautery does not recur at all times, and they consider this outcome.
And the reason is not as they think, because cautery is only used in places where medicine cannot reach to change the complexion and dry out the humidity that causes pain.
But nevertheless, cautery is superior to medicine in its strength and the effectiveness of its operation, as well as the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his ailment may return at some point in time, according to the patient's complexion and the location of his ailment, as well as his strength and what has been prepared in his body for the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he has received in his diet from similar causes; unless the ailment treated with cautery is a subtle ailment with few superfluities and humors, such as a tooth cautery for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return to him. But this only happens rarely.
And it is commonly said that the cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a correct statement, for I do not understand why they apply it, since I believe it is not a cure that benefits either with medicine or with any other means except cautery.
And the reason is contrary to that; and the belief that cautery is the last resort in medicine only applies when one administers various methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefits, and therefore at the end of the process one administers cautery, and it is beneficial for that. And from this one can see that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the opinion that I understand the common people and too many foolish doctors hold.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, although this is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and found that it does so only in some bodies without the others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as well; however when you make a cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction. And if you place on it a flame, the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire due to the occupation of that.
And for that reason, you should make the cautery with iron in a way that is as gentle and precise as possible for the operation to proceed correctly.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those from the head to the feet, so that I can provide what is needed for him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is effective against moisture and cold, which are two causes of the said accident, being the cause of soda and many rheumatic fluxes called rhinitis, which flows from the head to the area around the eyes and ears, much sleepiness, toothache and sore throat, and universally for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those diseases.
The way to perform this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to be evacuated with a purgative that cleanses the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
And then instruct him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that seated patient sit between your hands on a bench and place his feet on it.
And then place the palm of your hand gently on his nose between his eyes. But once your finger reaches the middle of the nose, mark that spot with ink, and then use a cautery tool shaped like an olive leaf.
Then place that [cautery tool] on the marked spot and press down gently, gradually increasing pressure with your other hand, and rotate it.
Then gently lift your hand and look at the spot. If you see any bone exposed, even as small as a grain of sand, then stop and lift your hand. If not, continue with that iron, or another one if it has become cold, until you see the bone as I have told you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it in water, then apply it to the spot for three days.
Then place a cloth soaked in vinegar on it and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed. Then treat the spot with Tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And they also say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm will be healed, because it is more beneficial and helpful.
And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held in place until a portion of the bone's substance is burnt off.
And then it should be scraped and cleaned of anything attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others say that with the cautery one should reach the very back, until it presses strongly into the bone, causing it to break, and this is the method of small apoplexy: And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men according to the way of fear; and let him be, in my opinion, better with health than without it, for the head is weakened by the breaking of its continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
And the first type of cautery, in my opinion, is safer and better; and with this I end and with this I work for health.
"Second Chapter.
"About Cautery of the Head
"When the entire head experiences chronic and prolonged pain, and the patient is using helmets, compresses, head purges, plasters, cups, bandages, and similar remedies, especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery that causes scarring and does not benefit him at all from any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong in its constitution; and it is not delicate but finds much cold, then that one should be cauterized with another cautery beside that one a little. "Then cauterize him on the crown of his head with a cautery until the membrane is opened. "Incise the membrane and expose as much bone as we mentioned earlier, then cauterize him with a cautery on the back of the head in the place called 'vas' — and this is the location where a cupping glass is placed. "And be careful with this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
"And I say this about the location of this cautery, because the cautery used for the crown of the head and the occiput should be more delicate than the one used for the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Based on the context provided and similarities with Romance languages, "Capitol ters" likely translates to:
Of the recent cautery for migraines.
When the pain in the head is severe, or it extends to the eyes, evacuate the head with cleansing medicines and administer the other treatment that I have mentioned in the discussions of illnesses; if this does not help, then cautery on him is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with a burning medicine is done by taking a woolen cloth and cleaning it well and tying off its ends on both sides. Then you must cut the painful area in the temple with a sharp lancet, until it reaches the bone, so that it is hidden underneath.
Then press strongly on it with a stopper to increase the pressure, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove it and take out the wool, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place over it a cloth soaked in wine vinegar until the area becomes warm.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the treatise of twelve burning medicines.
But in cauterization with iron according to this manner: here is how it's done with the cautery, and this is its form.
and it is called a nail-like hook, because the head of it is like a small flower in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small projection.
Then place [the cautery] over the area of pain, and hold your hand—so that the bow does not get burned, which is below—and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity [of skin] burned by the tip of the cautery is as much as half of it, lift your hand so that the blood vessel below is not burned, to prevent bleeding from occurring.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place a cloth with padding, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the blade of the scalpel according to this manner, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area especially.
Chapter Four.
On the Cauterization of an Old Wound.
When you treat migraine with the water we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not work, sometimes due to the illness not responding to what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the scalpel cautery until it is red-hot. This indicates the place of pain along a line equal to the length of the majority finger, or whichever one; and place your hand once and press firmly until you reach the artery and it penetrates into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which becomes thicker due to chewing, and that the ligament is not attached there and the nerves that cause pain in that area do not become spastic.
And if it is concerning the safety and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, because in its cutting there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not trained or experienced; leave the operation to one who has experience at the beginning.
And I come with the reminder of the management of bleeding from the artery according to its own manner in its place in this book.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if you go, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the tension of archery with cauteries having two blades, and this is a better cauterization and more effective.
Chapter V:
About the cauterization for earaches.
When the ear hurts due to cold and is not cured with purgative remedies or other treatments mentioned in the division, then apply the cautery, which is called puncture. Here is its form:
Then pierce close to the fire and guide it around the entire ear as if turning a wheel, or in a circle on each side if the pain is on one side. Hold the cautery near the edge of the ear, gradually approaching the spot to be cauterized.
And if the cautery has two points, apply one after the other, and then treat the places until they are healed.
Chapter VI
About the cauterization for sore throat.
Sore throat, which is cured with cauterization, occurs only due to the humors that come through phlegm, as mentioned in the division of diseases.
"Avoid cauterization of the spine due to dryness or nerve spasm.
"When you heal that kind of throat with jars and purgatives and gargles, and your cure does not succeed, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
"Place your cautery opposite the affected area, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
"And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize him with a cautery at the right end of the ear, higher by a little above the top of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and place your hand with the cautery until it has burned half the thickness of the tendon.
"And this is the form of the cautery, and it is similar to a knife, whose form is shown below. "However, it must be more subtle than a knife, as one sees, and the excessive thickness should be cut off somewhat.
And then care for the area with water that is previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
On the Cautery of Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on both corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done as it was said above.
And now that you have cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is worse afterward, then care for it with processed water.
Chapter 8.
On the Cautery of Forgetfulness Caused by Fever.
Give to the patient at the beginning large cups and pills to cleanse the humors.
Then shave all of the patient's head and place on their nape an ointment of wax, as described in the treatise on ointments.
And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cautery. And do this according to the aforementioned order that I have already mentioned.
And so if by that [treatment] the patient is cured; and if not, then make three cauteries on the lower part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down to the lowest part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that has been prepared.
But if the swelling increases and the patient is tolerating it, then make a cautery in the middle of the place; and if the swelling is more severe, then cauterize that above both eyes.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form mentioned before.
Chapter IX.
On the Cauterization of the Parazilus and on Softening the Entire Body.
Cover that you process in softening the head with jars and with the water that has been mentioned; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the eyes of the head, and with a cautery over the lower part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body from heat and the patients are tolerant, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the back's vertebrae, and afterwards with a cautery until it is covered with pus, and raise the patient's hand. And then care for that (area) until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Chapter 10
Of the Cauterization of Epilepsy
One should not cauterize an epileptic unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at its beginning with years and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient is great and tolerant of the rejection of medications.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer strengthening and chewable mixtures that cleanse, for several days, with the improvement of food.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that (area) with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on their occiput, and on each corner of the head, also cauterize. And if the patient is strong and enduring, then cauterize them with cauteries as I have described, after having caused paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be a cautery with olive oil as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterizing for Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned, in having caused paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a decline into superfluity, and the patient's body is wet, then give them water that purifies their brain according to what has been said before in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decently made circle from it, and then place that in the middle of the head. ‌
And let the patient be sitting calmly, and let them be held on all sides.
Then place an ointment; and it is more suitable to use old sheep fat. And warm him over a moderate fire, which is said to benefit him when he is most in need of it. Then place him in the middle of his head with the circle, and let him be cooled within it until he is chilled.
And do this with the patient once a week, along with his other treatment, until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize him by making small points according to his constitution, but make sure to have a hand with a cautery arranged in such a way: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then place this cotton ball soaked in wine or in linseed oil.
Chapter XII
On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Eye.
When you have identified the onset of water in the eye according to the signs that I mentioned in the previous division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and protect him from all moisture.
And have him sit in a bath of warm water for several days.
And then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on both temples if the water is issuing from both eyes, or with one strike if it is issuing from one eye.
In this case, you should make incisions with the cautery on all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone; and the cauteries should be placed at a distance from each other, equal to the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding from it, stop the blood with some medicine that is available to you.
And I come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in their removal, as well as in the prevention of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck under two bones with two very thin cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the most obvious part of the head outside, it is verified that this is a superfluous phlegmatic humor, then cauterize with the cautery that we mentioned at the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize that area on the entire back of the neck, near the edge of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.
It seems like there might have been a mistake in my previous response. The phrase "Capitol .xiiii." does not follow the pattern of the previous lines and does not seem to fit with the rest of the text. Could you please provide the next line or check if this is indeed part of the medieval medical treatise?
Of the cauterization for a smelly nose.
When you treat that with the water we mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then prepare [a mixture] and give the patient the [following ingredients] to drink for three nights; and after that, shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery of iron and a cautery of olive oil. And then cauterize that area with a clove cautery, using two cauteries on both eyebrows near the hairline, but just a little bit.
And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn too deeply.
And this is the way to make a clove cautery.
Chapter XV.
Of the use of a cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows with a small amount of cautery on both sides, in all parts, and they should be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
But do not press too hard with your hand on the cauteries; instead, according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI
Of the cautery on the eye when the hairs are turned inside and the eye is inflamed.
When the hairs of the eye are turned inside so that they prick the eye, cauterizing in these cases is done in two ways, because cauterization can be either with fire or with burning medicine.
If by cauterization with fire, command the patient before this to let their hair grow as those who have them shaved until they are prolonged and thinned out; and if that is the case, you must strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it does not worsen until the hairs grow back.
Therefore, when they have grown back and thinned out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and carefully mark on the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign that is according to the shape of a holly leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs. ›
And then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or in a paste made from flour on the wound.
And then prepare the cautery, which has this form:
And then cauterize on the figure that you have drawn, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the kidney is burnt, which appears like a myrtle leaf, very clearly.
The sign of the success of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hair on it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
Therefore, raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place on it cotton with a border until the scar has healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery on it just as you did at first.
But if the hairs remain on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
Let's translate the provided text line by line:
And place the said [medicine] on the wound and press it gently, do not remove it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in them like fire.
And so when he perceives that he has felt the bite, then let go of the medicine and wash it with your hand; when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and rinse the wound with water; and then consider if you see that the eyelid is lifted as it should be after removing the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well. And if not, return the medicine to the place where it was not applied and do not neglect [it] until your operation is complete and the wound is closed.
Then place over it a compress with borders until the swelling from the inflammation is removed, and then treat it with an ointment of henbane or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to conduct your operation with careful vigilance so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after several days the eyelid is softened and some hairs are protruding from the wound, then repeat your medicine on that part of the eyelid which is softened, exactly as you did at first, and then remove it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the heels of men are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
And do not hide the path of righteousness from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII
Of cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the water we mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to put his head on your lap, and have another person hold the patient's head between their hands so that it is not moved or shaken.
Then place a piece of cotton dipped in egg white or honey and flour over the patient's eye.
And then heat up the cautery, which looks like this:
Which should be concave, as is the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, one end of which is used to make the cautery.
And if you want it to be, it should penetrate into the other end. "And if you want it to be thus as you intend.
"But however, the one who is skillful is better suited for this task.
"Then immediately press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it the pus and dry it out. "And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
"Then immediately place the cautery on it, which should be well-lit. With that skilled hand, hold a little below the tip of the cautery at the base of the nose, so that your hand does not burn or cause discomfort to the patient. Then place the cautery in the grooves of the nose and apply heat to it.
"And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it like this for three days. Then place a plaster over the spot and surround it with drying ointment until it heals.
"But if twelve days have passed and it is not healed, then apply over it a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
Based on the pattern and structure of the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
And if the fistula is healed with the water we have mentioned from the cautery and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision of the nose and reduce the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
About the cauterization of the split in the feet.
Often such splits occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure these splits with the water we have mentioned in the divisions and your cure does not work, then burn the cautery with a small knife according to this form that follows:
And let its concavity be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then place that carefully in those splits until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
And then cure it with plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the root of the teeth, and it begins to fester, and it breaks open, and it heals, but continues to fester and a fistula is formed, and you cure it but the cure does not work, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size that fits in the fistula, and put that ignited [cautery] into the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its depth, and do this once or twice; and then cure it with the water we have mentioned for the treatment until it is healed.
And therefore, if the wound is healed and has been healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotting bones as it will be explained in its chapter.
Chapter XX
About the cauterization of teeth and the softening of veins.
When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery of the form which will be shown later, so that you place the spoon over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, holding it with your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand, and then repeat with the cautery several times as you wish.
And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI
"On the cautery for toothache.
"When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is an abscess or worm in the tooth, and you do not administer medicine for the cure, then you should cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
"Cauterize with a horn by taking a cow's horn and filling it with hot iron filings, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, next immerse it in hot iron filings and place it on the painful tooth immediately until it becomes numb.
"And repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
"And if you prefer, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn [filings], and place it on the painful tooth, then place hot iron on top until the heat reaches the depth of the cavity.
"However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the tip of an awl or needle, and there be some thickness in its core so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is heated; do this several times because the pain will be reduced either that day or the next.
It is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good odor from the impression of that cautery and holds it for one hour, and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And use the cautery on whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of the cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines and you wish to achieve light digestion of those, then heat the cautery as follows: it should have two openings so that smoke can escape from one opening, and place the heated cautery on the swelling once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth soaked in good odor on it until what the fire has burned is healed.
And then care for him with ointments, bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of a hoarse voice and constriction of breath.
When moisture comes over the passage of the lung, and especially when this is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with purgative medicines, and afterwards you must cauterize him in the region of the throat in the depressed area.
And be careful not to go too deep with the cautery into the throat, nor burn more than a little of its length.
And then you must cauterize him with another cautery in the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. The cautery for this should be heated as described before.
Then care for him with the water previously mentioned until he is healed.
Chapter 24
On the Cauterization of Lung Ailments and Coughing
When coughing and lung ailments are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or tisics, and it is an old ailment, then you should cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas, one on each side; and with another cautery in the middle of the sole of the foot between the two mamillos; and the cauteries should be heated as described before.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be done with the pointed instrument called "punctum," whose shape should precede in the treatment of earache pain.
And place points [or: make incisions] into these areas; and then care for it with the water that has been prepared beforehand until it is healed.
And let there be three parts to the cautery, for cauterization is done with this: in one application you can perform three cauteries according to this method:
This seems out of place and does not correspond to any part of the previous text. It appears to be a chapter heading or some other type of marker, rather than a sentence in the same style as the previous ones. Is there more context available for this phrase?
On the cauterization of the head of the little finger.
When the head of the little finger is dislocated due to excessive moisture and does not return to its proper place within the hour, you should wait for the dislocation until it customarily returns, and then with a small movement, it will return to its place, as we have shown. Therefore, it is necessary that you first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; and then lift the heel of the hand that is on the inside of the little finger towards the outside parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inside parts.
And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates through to the other side; and the figure of cautery will then have four ends.
And sometimes it fits according to this method, and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place powdered salt on the cautery, and then have the patient hold still, so that the limb is not moved at all for any time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done later, then cauterize on the muscle with a clavicle cautery or with several pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture enters the stomach until it causes vomiting, and if you continue the treatment methods without improvement, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their hands and legs extended, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet with a quantity of a finger's length using a clavicle cautery, and two cauteries below each side of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cautery becomes triangular; and the ones that are not well placed will cause blistering.
And if the depth of the cautery equals two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured at the point that is indicated by this cautery: and it is such that you know on the stomach [the points] according to the amount that you wish, with a tentative touch, and then cauterize those [points] with the cautery; and then treat those [points] with the treatment that has been described until they are healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Cauterization of a Fractured Foot.
When there is pain in the foot due to cold, humidity, or excessive flatulence, until its normal function is restored by the removal of excess fluid, and the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and without food, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed on their back, and examine with a tentative touch three cauteries according to this form and this quantity, placing them on the foot below the hypochondrium, which is the man's lying position.
And let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be placed along the length of the body correctly.
And do not press too hard with the cauteries.
And if the amount of water that has been heated is equal to half the length of a codfish, and it is not hot enough; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not, then they should be sitting, with their limbs extended and their arms raised.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when it is with your skill and wisdom in the art.
And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the length of the entire codfish be heated so that the whole body is heated and reaches into the intestines, for the codfish here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of the perforation of a pustule in the foot with a cautery.
When you wish to open or perforate a pustule in the foot and want to know if that pustule is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without acuity.
And if it is in the lung's pleura, with the pain being very sharp and often tiring doctors from caring for it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their side; then mark the location of the abscess with a sign; and then heat up the cautery which resembles a needle, whose shape has been shown on the previous page. And cauterize with that [cautery] until the entire cord is burnt away, until it reaches the center, until pus comes out.
Then treat this in the same way as for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery except for the one about which medical studies have been prolonged, and with which most patients have become familiar; however, this has been attempted on some occasions for this operation, but nevertheless, leave that to us, and it will be better.
Chapter 29
On the Cauterization of Plague.
The ancients said that the cautery for plague sores should be made in this manner: Take a long, dry reed from the wild rose bushes, which is pointed and as thick as a finger.
Certainly! Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text into English:
And it is not necessary for you to cover your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be visible at the end of the handle.
And some ancient people said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron similar to ray and ignite it in the place which is between the ribs, until they reach with it an abscess and the pus is evacuated, as we have said in the case of foot abscess.
However, in this perforation with a cautery, there is danger, for one could die immediately if it happens in the place of a fistula that does not heal.
Chapter .30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the disease of the spleen with what has been said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve a cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the foot's cauteries, whose figure precedes.
And the space between each cautery should be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of making the cautery should be the same manner as has been said for the foot's cauteries equally.
"And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be face down on their back.
"And there is another way to cauterize, which involves heating the cautery with two openings, as mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lifting the chain that is at the level of the spleen, so that it touches the left side of the patient's body.
"And let your elevation with which you lift the chain be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the breadth of the body.
"And now insert the two openings, heated very much, into that opening through which you will pass the chain from the other side.
"And then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries have been made.
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
"And then take care of the cautery after it has finished dripping for too many days, because it is more comfortable than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Chapter 31
"On Cauterizing Dropsy
"Do not perform cauteries on patients with dropsy, but rather on the bladder specifically.
When you treat a person with dropsy using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to use four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the ribs, another on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right foot, and another on the stomach. And let the depth of the cauterization be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cauterized wound open so that it may discharge for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of treatment immediately after the cauterization with water as it should be given to them in two doses, and then quickly feed them with healing aids.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be pointed, as its form has been mentioned above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be oval, as its form has been mentioned previously.
Chapter 32
On the Cauterization of Feet and Hips.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the place that is between the ankle and the fourth toe, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not lower it completely, because the serous fluid will drain.
It seems like you've provided a sentence in an old Romance language, possibly Occitan or Catalan, based on the context of medieval medical treatises. Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line into English: And let the cauteries be according to the length of the cushion, placing one at the top and another in the middle of the cushion; and on each cushion two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without dressing for a long time so that any water can drain from it.
And treat him with these remedies that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33
On the Cauterization of the Abdomen.
When the abdomen is afflicted by cold and moisture to the point of weakening the vital forces—which are the digestive and retentive faculties located in the stomach and intestines—it is treated with various methods of healing and not with purgatives. Sometimes, patients endure cautery that reveals the vital force; in such cases, treat them with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has been said about the cauterization of the stomach, using circular cauteries and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as a subtle claw-shaped cautery, and one or two cauteries on the abdomen.
And if the abdomen is afflicted by excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then treat them with a cautery on the penis and testicles, and place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, because this treatment is perfectly curative and does not cause error.
Chapter 34
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When old hemorrhoids are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture in nature and they have been treated with water as mentioned earlier, but the cure is not effective, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus under the small of the back with a small triangular cautery. Also, place a cautery above the navel through two times.
And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is undigested, and their face is pale, then cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach as previously described; and with one cautery on the navel, and another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Chapter 35
Of the cauterization of a tumor near its incision.
When you cut a tumor, then heat the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then place that heated cautery in the incised tumor and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, because if the pustules are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water mixed with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part of the body, it is more dangerous for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
About cauterizing fistulas that occur naturally in the divisions of the body.
When nature does not respond to the work we have described in its place, and the patient is disturbed by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural body part that is old, it bleeds and has corrupt humidity. And therefore, what is most worthy to do is to explore that with a subtle probe, and then you will know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. And then place that heated cautery on this fistula, according to the quantity in which you have inserted the probe.
And repeat the cautery on that part until the corrupt flesh is burned once or twice or three times, according to your need.
And beware of the burning of nerves and veins; or if there is a fistula going into the body of the bladder or into the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you believe it will not penetrate.
And then heal the area so that it may heal.
And if the place is sealed and all the matter has been cut away from it and it remains like this for a long time, then know that it has been completely cured.
And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in its bones, or this comes from those causes of which there will be a memory in its place.
Chapter 37.
Of the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive flatulence, and as a result the patient's skin is dried out, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each hemorrhoid with a pointed iron of which we have spoken before.
And perform the cautery strongly with the second one a little after, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and thus they will be more durable in help.
Based on the pattern of the provided text, it appears that each section is labeled with a Roman numeral indicating its chapter or section number. Here's how you can approach translating this:
"On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
"When there is debility and softening in the bladder due to cold and moisture to such an extent that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the bladder, below where the pubic hairs begin, using a pointed cautery on the right side and another on the left.
"The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's navel; and cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
"And let the cautery be pointed according to the process.
"Chapter 39
"On the Cauterization of the Womb.
"When cold and moisture occur in the womb, preventing conception, corrupting its menses, delaying their onset, and causing pain during menstruation, then the area should be cauterized with three pointed cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder; and with a pointed cautery below the back, or with two cauteries.
"Capitol XL" translates to "Chapter XL.
"On the Cauterization of Ankle Dislocation.
"When moist humors are infused in the area of the ankle and have caused it to move from its place, a sign of this is that one part of the joint protrudes over the other when compared. "And the location of the dislocation is found in the swollen area.
"Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the affected area of their ankle with a circular-shaped cautery. Before doing this, you will test the area by rotating a probe around it to ensure that the affected part is in the center of the circle.
"And let the shape of the cautery used be similar to that used for stomach cauterization.
"And if this type of cautery is not available, then use three cauteries with large olive-shaped heads.
"And let the cautery be performed according to the size of the swelling in all the joints; and afterwards, care for that part until it heals.
"Chapter XLI
"On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
"When there is pain in the ankle area and it is caused by cold and moistness, treat the patient with the remedies we have mentioned earlier, but if they are not effective or become old-fashioned, then you should remove the gross humors from the patient using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills. Afterwards, cauterize that area.
The manner of the cautery in this case is according to two manners: cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire.
According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area at the base of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, whether it is an olive-sized or large cautery.
However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the ankle, as there are four cauteries in total.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form for the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which is a continuous circle and burns the tip of the entire tendon.
And this is the manner of cauterization for gout when the pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
However, if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where you direct the patient's pain, which is the dolor; and with one cautery on the knee four fingers above the lateral side.
And if you are using a surgical knife for the cautery, ensure that the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the ligament.
And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to other parts of the body, then cauterize those areas as well, using three or four points, or more if necessary.
And if the patient indicates that there is pain beneath the navel towards the thigh, then cauterize that area with a surgical knife.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not go too deep with the cautery to avoid burning nerves or large blood vessels, as this could cause harm or contraction in the patient.
And I have seen one or two cases where the person who performed the cautery went too deep and the leg became inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, which then became gangrenous and rotted entirely. And this can lead to a severe case of intestinal perforation, and even death.
And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise have said that in the cautery of water, one should use a cautery similar to this: make it like an iron ring whose circumference is half the size of a palm; and its orifices should be according to the thickness of a datil bone or less.
And within that circle should be another third; and the space that is between them should be the width of the thumb; and these circles should be open on two sides; and the length of those chains should be one night or two nights, and make in those margins decent ironwork adorned on the circles; and this is its form:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it glows and emits sparks, and then place it on the open wound of the patient while they lie on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave it for three days; then bandage that with cloth and let the wound remain open for several days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Al-Zahrawi: Oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of its aftercare and because few are those who care for it afterwards.
But from the good cauteries comes benefit to those who endure them and find relief with them.
But cauteries with adherent medicines are that you make two circles having a perforated ring in which they put the handle of an iron door; let the length of the walls in their height be two nights or even those.
And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of the said [finger/toe]; and they are opened below and above, and they should contain themselves between them according to this form:
And immediately place the patient lying on his side, and press your hand on the part of the ankle; then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and heat that little by little with fire, and keep that for the duration of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of him — for this remedy bites as if from fire — until the biting ceases.
And immediately lift your hand with the instrument and wash away all the hot water from the entire ankle with cold water.
And leave it alone for three days and place on that border until the blackness of the adjustment has disappeared, and leave it like this for several days, and then there will be a peeling from him; this is last in help.
And immediately care for that with ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done with the ankle in the same way.
And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of lye and chalk, both not fully extinguished, one part of each, mix them and place in a new tile, through which the upper part is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters the beam.
And place beneath the tile another inverted tile, and pour over that lye and chalk live water, two fingers' width, and after you have compressed them well with your hand, let the sharp water descend from above into the lower part of the inverted tile.
And then adjust all that water and pour it over more live chalk and renewed lye, because at this point it will have a very strong acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because it acts like fire.
And thus some of the medicines with which one is cauterized, such as terebinth and honey anacard and chalk with soap, should be mixed in this way.
And Gualia recounts of a man from ancient times the operation and cure by which pain of the ankle and sciatica is healed, and she says that nothing else is needed for this cure, and it works once as she recounts, because afterwards that person enters a bath and immediately comes out healed.
And it should be taken from green nettle, and if green is not found, then take a recent fig; and it should be crushed with a little gray [salt], and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and bound.
And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the pain.
And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is reddened, let them step onto the ground, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except to evacuate the body.
But Escorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the cut of a goat, it benefits more; and cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
And then take a piece of dry goatskin and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and remove any impurities so that it is pure. And then repeat this process, and do not stop doing so until the feeling of biting reaches the water, relieving the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called "cautery with cups.
Chapter XLII
On the cauterization for back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various reasons, such as falling or blows, or excessive discharge of fluids, and similar causes, through the infusion of cold, damp material.
Cauterization is only effective in this particular type, which is caused by an infusion of cold material.
Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purging pills and similar remedies, which should be made on the back where the pain is located, in three lines according to its width. And after ten days on each line, cauterize or make as many incisions as needed, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the medicine.
And a pointed cautery should be used for the cauterization.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four mid-line nail-shaped cauteries in this manner:
Chapter 43
On Cautery at the Onset of Jaundice
This illness is often found in small children; and the first sign of its onset in children is that they experience a swelling and movement over their limbs, especially in the joints of their hips.
And you will find that it starts to appear on the last vertebrae of the back and in the buttocks, which begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it from spreading, immediately cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as shown here: so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebrae equally.
And if you wish, you may also cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the area until it is healed as we have said.
But be careful not to administer cautery in cases of jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout caused by coldness is treated and the pain is not reduced, then proceed with cauterization.
You should cauterize in that area around the joint of the foot using several cauteries.
And this is how it looks:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries on all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need more cauteries than these, then cauterize accordingly, but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only around the size of a bean.
And if the pain moves into the big toe and the second toe, then administer the cautery as we said in its chapter.
"And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called suagra, then prick around the fingernails as they revolve, pricking in those two lines.
"And if the pains remain in the said places, then prick around each nail and on the tip of the finger.
"And if the pains approach the shoulders or arms after several days, then cauterize each part of the entire arm.
"And do not evacuate the patient with good regulation and reception of medications, because if a good regulation is made and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God helping.
"Chapter XLV
"On the Cauterization of Fractures
"When there is a fracture in the shins, and the intestines protrude before the bladder into the genital area, and this begins to happen, it is necessary that you tell the patient to stop eating on that day and to use lenient causes so that the opening of their stomach.
"And follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the stone is thrown out or the bladder or intestines appear.
And then return that one with the said words and signals, attempting to cause a break on the bones of the patella with a sign indicating the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery, the form of which is this:
until it becomes very red and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and press until you reach the bones of the patella halfway between the thighs; and repeat this action once more if you have not reached the bone in the first attempt.
And carefully observe the protrusion of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn that intestine and cause death or other great harm to come upon the patient.
And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bones, lest you harm your work.
And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then care for the cauterized area for three days with bandages until the scar of the fire is removed.
And then care for that [person] with other ointments until they are healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, until the place and the wound are sealed.
And it is fitting that you regulate the patient's food according to the length of time of their cure, which will prevent their belly from bursting and the intestines from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And then when [the patient] wants to get up after about forty days, administer a properly made poultice, and let [him/her] have it for another forty days.
And let [him/her] be restrained from work and excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when [he/she] uses this complete regimen of healing, [he/she] will surely be healed.
And I will speak of the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and so at first, if you do not want them to stop, then cauterize that rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is exhaled from the intestines be as well as the third part [of it]; and then care for [the patient] with what we have said, and it will not burst.
"And some said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is indicated by touch.
"And a line is placed that runs along the length of the wound above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
"Chapter XLVI.
"On the Cauterization of Hernia
"When pain persists in certain members due to injury or impact and this pain lasts for a long time and is not relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
"And the size of the cautery should be appropriate for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, and strength and weakness of it, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
"Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary for those pains to be transferred from one member to another nearby, so it is necessary to catch them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitulum .xlvii.
De Cauterizatione Leprosae.
Some lepers are treated with cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of black bile and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize this person, consider if the leprosy is common and whether it has been treated with the water we mentioned in the division, and neither let them say nor do this, lest the corruption spread throughout their body and affect all of its parts; then cauterize that person on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another below it, towards the forehead to the hairline; and both on two temples; and one at the back, either on the nape or neck.
And complete your work with the cauteries a little deeper, pressing into the bone slightly, and from this displacement let the scabs be removed, so that the exhalation of gross vapors may be relieved from him; and cauterize on the spleen as necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread across the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the soles and one on each sole, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the pads of his palms.
And beware of the nerves that are on the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the thigh.
And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with their hands, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as has been said above in the chapter on tools.
And then care for the cautery with wheat flour mixed with honey and with the other remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48
On the Cauterization of Stupor
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
And let your cautery enter the spine a little bit. Then care for that [area] with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes cautery is applied to certain numbness that should be in the hands and feet, as well as the spine of the back, where the nerves controlling that member are located, and the numbness is removed.
But do not attempt this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves moving throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX
On the Cautery of Morphea
When the morphea is old and you do not cure it with any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a cautery for a short while, according to the size of the thread-like appearance, until its whiteness and color are removed and its color changes.
Then cure it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils, with rose oil and mullein leaves, and with pigeon blood or swallow blood, each being one part, and all mixed together. Then take a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Chapter LI
On the Cautery of Cancer
When cancer begins and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as if it were turning.
And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle part; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and indeed I have seen this happen on several occasions.
And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around it with a circular pattern as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 1.
On the Cauterization of Hernias.
When some hernias are delayed in maturing, and this is due to the excessiveness of that [hernia] or the state of the patient, who is old and weak-bodied, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with many small cauteries; and thus leave it, for it will hasten in maturing. 》
But if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is like this [demonstrated above], and place that in the middle of the hernia until it penetrates the intestine.
And if you put the cautery in that place which is lower, so that the body of the arm may be relieved; and then cure it until it is healed.
This appears to be a chapter heading or title, similar to "Chapter 52" in modern texts. A direct translation would simply be:
Of the cauterization of a malignant wound.
Corrodent is corruption walking in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corruption in the place where it should be cauterized with fire, then you burn cautery nails very few and large, according to what is suitable for that place where it is corrupting.
And then cauterize it from all sides until you have completely eradicated all corruption and nothing of it remains.
And then let it rest for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice made of oil mixed with herbs until all scabs have been completely removed and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days you see that the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery in those places where it was corrupt.
And a malignant wound is treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because that is similar to cauterization. However, cauterization by fire is more beneficial for the discharge of pus.
"And I have already said the treatment for him with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you will see his illness.
Chapter 33.
Of Cautery for Wounds and Other Similar Conditions
Many times it is seen in the parts below the sick foot that are called wound, and they are large, deep, which affect the foot; and cautery in these is done in two ways: by fire cautery and by hot water cautery.
However, fire cautery is performed by igniting the cautery in the shape of a vulture's quill, which should be made of iron according to the size that encompasses the entire wound on all sides, and it should have fine edges.
Then place that lit cautery on the wound and then turn your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound. And leave it there for three days until it begins to throw out pus. And then plaster it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will have uprooted its roots.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from the meat of a male goat until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and similar incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery with water. Take a small tube made of copper, iron, or a vulture's quill, and place it over the nail; then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water, hold your hand firmly on the tube, and rotate it vigorously with your hand. Press the edges of the tube against the surface of the nail, so that the hot water finds its way to the root of the nail. Wait for the patient to feel the heat of the water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be corrected.
Do this to all such [afflictions] until you have treated every one of them that is on the body.
Then treat those ulcers whose roots have been eradicated by the water of those ointments which cause flesh to regenerate.
Chapter III
On Cautery for Tremors
When some tremor occurs due to a chill in the nerves or due to fever of cold cause, or for any similar reason, then you should cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the spine's vertebrae, one between each vertebra; and with cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, with olive oil cautery.
And the person's tremor will subside, hastening the health of the cold-caused illness.
Chapter 50.
On cauterizing various incidents in the body.
When the body is afflicted with various ulcers and pustules, which are made from gross, corrupt materials; then it is necessary at the beginning of their appearance that they be cauterized on the head of each fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle stick, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with a long razor; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes these are cauterized in the same way at the beginning of their expulsion; and they do not become worse, and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they heal from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done after proper evacuation with phlebotomy.
It looks like you've provided only a chapter number in Latin ("Capitol lvi."), which translates to "Chapter 56" in English. Since this is not a full sentence, I need more text to provide a line-by-line translation into English. Please provide the next sentence or paragraph for a more complete translation.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it into English:
When it happens to someone, then you should immediately grasp the wound with your hand at the opening of the artery, and press firmly on it until the flow of blood ceases under your finger, and it does not come out.
Then heat the olive-based cauteries, both small and large, in the fire by the count of nine, and blow on them until they are very hot.
Then take one of these, either small or large, depending on the location and wound where the artery has been ruptured. Quickly place it on that vein after you have removed your finger, and apply the cautery until the blood is sealed and constricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery immediately from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this with one after another until the blood is constricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, lest it bring upon the patient another ailment.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said before, or by extraction when it has not been extracted; for when it is extracted, its extremities are better burned and the blood is constricted. Or it can be ligated with thread or a bandage with great force, or medicines whose property is to constrict the blood may be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion and proper constriction.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it step by step:
This text appears to be discussing a medical procedure for treating a wound or an injury related to a blood vessel (vein). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Of incision, perforation, and venesection, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds, and their likenesses.
In the first chapter, we have mentioned all illnesses in which it is appropriate to use a heated cautery or combustible medicine, as well as their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for this purpose with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be comforted regarding what he has asked about.
And before I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn, my son, that in this chapter there is something similar to what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And because it is necessary to exercise great caution in this, for the operations that are frequently performed in this chapter involve the evacuation of blood, with which life is connected. You must be careful not to cut or puncture a vein, incise over an abscess, open an exit wound, clean a wound, extract an arrow, or remove a stone and similar things. xspace Based on the pattern of the previous translations, here's my attempt at translating this sentence:
And I warn you that nothing should fall on you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes it may happen that you handle men with many diseases. And there are some who will depart with their illness, and it will be easy for them to die, and this is due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and death is feared because of which it signifies.
And among them is he who gives you his property and goods, and you expect to have health with him; but his illness is harmful (to your health).
Therefore, it is not fitting for you to consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; and let your caution be greater than greed, and do not presume any reason except certain knowledge which confirms what is suitable for you, and with whom a praiseworthy succession occurs.
And use in the care of all your sick the prognosis and indication for him who has health turned into salvation, because in that is your help towards gaining fame and memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not take away direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Capítulo primero.
De la curación del agua que está contenida en la cabeza de los niños.
Sabes que esta enfermedad se produce a menudo en los niños recién nacidos y cuando la nodriza aprieta demasiado la cabeza del niño sin consideración.
Y en algunos casos ocurre por una razón oculta que no se conoce.
Pero yo nunca he visto esta enfermedad en personas mayores; y todos los que he visto han muerto debido a esto, y así se ve un trabajo desagradable en ellos.
Y he visto un niño cuya cabeza estaba llena de agua, y su cabeza siempre estaba así magnificada hasta que no podía levantarse sobre sí mismo debido al tamaño de su cabeza, y más que la humedad aumentaba hasta que murió.
Y esta humedad se acumula entre los huesos y las membranas, o se acumula debajo de los huesos en el cráneo.
Porque si la operación se realiza cuando la humedad está entre las membranas y los huesos y el absceso es pequeño, entonces debes cortar en el medio de la cabeza con una incisión vertical, y la longitud de la incisión debe ser de dos dedos de ancho hasta que drene toda la humedad. Y esta es la forma del espátula: 🤔
And so if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is large, then there are two incisions in this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from within, and this is not hidden to you. You should cut into the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:
And then extract all the humidity through the incision; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and compresses; and then dress it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with tenths and ointments, and bind the head tightly; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the limb is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you consider based on the size of the abscess and the accumulation of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right side, or in the left; and therefore pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and the patient die from that bleeding with a loss of fluids.
Chapter Second.
When some cataracts or bruises occur in the eyes or feet, and this is old and does not respond to medical treatment, then the last resort for this is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise these (arteries), have the patient raise his head, and then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries become apparent. Then tightly tie the patient's neck with some cloth; and then feel for the pulse; and press on the places where each of these is near the ears, and they will be hidden in some people (i.e., the arteries may not be visible or easily accessible).
Then mark the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the sharp tip of the scalpel, penetrating into the bone, and this should be done along the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and break it through the skin at the affected area.
And let the length of the incision be two fingerbreadths, because when a vein is cut, blood will flow out with a throbbing exit, which jumps out frequently.
However, if the artery does not appear immediately, then you should measure from the ear the space of three fingers, and then probe with a sound, and find the bone.
And the amount of blood to be released is one-sixth of a pint, and do not take too much from him, whether more or less, and all this depends on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then consider the wound, and thus if there is any cause of infection remaining on the bone, then cut it out so that an abscess does not form.
And then strengthen the wound with compresses and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III
Of the removal of the temples' arteries.
When someone suffers from an old migraine or severe headache due to humid humors and the quality of the temples' tendons, or has a violent and similar swelling, and it is not helped by medical treatments, then we resort to these illnesses with the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of those, as we have shown.  (Note: The phrase "humid humors" and other references to ancient medical theories reflect the medieval context of the text.)
And the manner of this operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hair that is on their temples; and observe the prominent artery in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or pour hot water over the area until the artery becomes clearly visible to you. And then take the spatula, which has this form: And then you easily scrape the vein with it until you reach the artery; and then pour medicine into it and extract it from its highest parts until you remove it from the vein and expose it from all the tissues that were covering it.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (small knife or scalpel), and then cut off a piece of it according to the length by which its ends are extended and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not rise completely.
And approximately evacuate one to three cups of blood.
And if the wound is large, then it is necessary for you to bind it in two places with strong double-plied silk or with long cords, and do not allow it to become infected before the wound heals and prevent bleeding.
Then immediately cut away the excess flesh that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or about another hour later.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a pointed cautery into the bone with a scalpel until the edges of the wound are burned off, and this will serve as that same operation.
And it is a better procedure if the patient has a fever or inflammation of the skin; because cautery helps to dry out moisture and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is also appropriate to clean the wounds by applying cotton on top of them, and decent bandages should be placed over them, and then they should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with poultices until they are healed.
And if during the operation you notice further bleeding from the wound, then quickly apply pressure to stop the bleeding, either with a cautery, or by filling the wound with cotton, and keep pressure until the bleeding stops. And if none of those reasons are present, then place your finger on the wound until the blood clots, and pour cold water over the area until the pain subsides, and it should be bandaged as needed.
And what is lighter in the extraction of arrows is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery, which has two blades, after having marked both places with a probe, and carefully place each one, very hot, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends is elongated, because it is not solidified in its entirety by this cautery.
And here is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two blades be equal. However, if the sharpness is less than that of two blades, it is better because if they are too sharp like two blades, one will cut the flesh more quickly.
Therefore, as these are somewhat thicker, they retain the heat of the fire and cut the flesh more gently.
And this work is better for all works and lighter.
Based on the context and similarities to Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation attempt of the given sentence:
Chapter four.
On the care of the body for acute and sharp pains in the eyes.
When the tears are sharp and it is the body of those veins that are on top of the head outside, do not use any cause for the care of medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and they feel a sensation of ants crawling on their forehead, and the eyes of such people become exhausted and wet to the point that their hairs are bent down, and the eyelids are cut by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient healers used this operation for the care of these, and they named that care with a sponge.
You should order the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three equally spaced incisions into the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the cut is two digits: let one cut be equally distant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the small movement of the little fingers that are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
Be careful with the starting point of the arteries that are on both sides and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if each incision is spaced apart by three times the width of a finger.
And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth, use it to absorb the blood.
And then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, and this is how the incision should look like for it: which extends from the temples down to the second incision. Remove with it the entire membrane that is between two incisions on top of the bone, and then do this from the middle incision to the second incision. And then insert this spatula into the first incision once more, and then introduce another instrument called a lancet, which is sharp on one end and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp end against the flesh attached to the membrane, and the other end against the bone, and use it to reach the midline fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But continue the incision until it appears through the membrane, and then do this in the midline fissure to the other fissure.
And because there is a quantity of blood flowing, press the areas where the cold blood gathers.
And then place in each small crack some old cloth and place over those lumps covered with wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that an abscess does not form.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or warm tea, and then treat it with an ointment made of basilicum oil and rose oil until the wounds are healed. ✓
Chapter V.
Of the treatment of catarrh and the sores that descend from the inner parts of the head.
When someone has an acute and persistent catarrh, and sometimes the sores of the patient are small and worn out, and their appearance is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hairs fall out, and there is a sharp pain in the front of the head accompanied by consequent wasting away, then you should know from these symptoms that the catarrh comes only from the small veins of the inner parts.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in it, at the middle of the forehead, a small one by size (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' skin which is bad because of chewing), until the bone is exposed. ✓
"Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old cloth or clean rags. "Then tightly bind it above with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that it does not become an abscess.
"And when you loosen this and see that the abscess has diminished, it is then necessary to rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow on it, and then cure it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh come forth, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture and apply it to these wounds for the generation of new flesh.
"Chapter VI.
"On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
"Everything that falls into the ears is of one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it comes from a plant, such as a seed or a bean; or it is something fluid, like water or sour wine, or any creature.
"And therefore, when a stone falls into the ear or something similar to those things that do not fit or grow in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or cumin on it, and then administer the extraction from it. Make the person sneeze by irritating them, and cover their nostrils so that the sneezing will expel it. Based on the context and the similarity to Romance languages, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
And if it has not yet been achieved, then administer an extraction with the instrument called "subtle gesticulator" of which this is the form:
And if it was successfully extracted with a gesture, then it is good; and if not, then administer an extraction to the patient with a fine, double-edged lancet.
And therefore, if it has not been successfully extracted in this manner, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing is open except for the tube. Then extract it with your own breath using strong suction, because many times we have seen this method work.
But if it cannot be extracted in this way, then take some waxed or veil-covered cloth with which birds are caught, and place that on the tip of a reed, and then wrap it around the affected area securely. Then gently insert that into the opening of the ear, and then carefully dry the ear of any moisture.
And therefore, if it has not been successfully removed using all the methods we have mentioned, then you should prepare to cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of performing this is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to his strength, then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards the divided parts above, and with a small incision in the edge of the ear, place the grease of the patient in the most affected area. And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision at that moment, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the cause of the growth in the ear is one of the fats that has grown and swollen, then administer the treatment and removal of it; but if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine spatula according to this form: and use that to excise the growth that has formed in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been softened by the heat of the ear, and put a lot of weight on it, and then extract from there with scissors or a fine needle, or with an incision as we have said, because it makes the extraction easier.
Here's my attempt to translate the given text: Therefore, do not stop with this until all the water is drained out.
Therefore, do not stop with this until all the water is drained out. And when the water has been drained out, take a piece of paper or cloth and insert one end into the ear. Extend the other end with fire until it is burned inside.
Then insert another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drained out, and then use a probe as mentioned above with the extracting stone.
But in the extraction of a small object entering that ear, if it is a small body and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes swelling inside the ear canal, then administer the extraction with tweezers and scissors, and its cause is lighter than all other causes that enter the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to look at the ear in the sunlight.
And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine hooks. But if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide-tipped cannula, which has this form: And insert the fine tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
But if the patient does not tolerate this, then you should plug and seal the circumference of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distilled remedies that the ancients have already tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your preparation be with which you instill the medicinal oils in the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or brass, narrow, with a small hole, and flat on top.
And thus it should be fitted so that it is in the cavity of the cannula containing what will be necessary here. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it neatly around the end of a cotton swab, then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicine you choose to put in the cannula — which is in the ear —, then insert the ray with cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which has been infiltrated into the ear should already have been scraped with fire, a little bit. And be careful that the cause which you will instill into the ear is not too cold, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of earaches.
Sometimes some children are born with their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this also happens in some men, an obstruction occurs in the meat of the ear by a wound or flesh growing there; and sometimes this obstruction is made in the preon (forehead) of the hole of the ear which does not recognize the sound, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And that which occurs in the preon of the ear, which does not recognize sound, is in the greatest difficulty of healing.
And in that which allows sound to pass through, you should place the patient's ear towards the sunlight and observe it. Therefore, if you see an obvious obstruction, open it with a thin spatula of this form:
If the end of it is narrow in width, one side being sharp and the other not; and let the spatula be two fingerbreadths long, so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
And thus if the tumor is flesh-born in the ear or the meat of it, then take that with sharp scissors and cut it down until all the flesh has been removed.
And if the tumor is in the front part of the ear, then take thin strips of wool and heat them with fire for a while, and then place them on the meat of the ear.
Therefore, if you detect swelling with water that the patient finds uncomfortable due to heaviness, try to alleviate their discomfort by reducing the pressure on them; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear cloths of linen according to the size of the hole that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herbs and immerse them in water, crush them and use the liquid; and if you see the ear already draining, then it is necessary that you remove the herbs and replace them with another herb wrapped in wax made with rose oil, until the abscess has subsided; and then care for it until it heals.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Capitolo VIII.
Capítulo VIII: Sobre el cuidado del quelque se desarrolla en los párpados.
Capítulo VIII: Sobre el cuidado del quelque que se desarrolla en los párpados de los ojos, algunas veces están húmedos, otras veces secos.
Por lo tanto, es necesario que tengas esos con pinceladas o con ungüento, y los cortes con espátula de sus raíces, y luego coloca sobre los lugares según lo indicado.
Pero si el dolor viene con flujo de sangre, entonces cauteriza esos con un cauterio delicado.
Y la mejor cauterización es justo después de las incisiones y cuando se han repetido varias veces debido a alguna causa de sus raíces; y cuando están cauterizadas con fuego, esas raíces son quemadas y no vuelven.
Capítulo IX.
Tratamiento del crecimiento que se produce en los párpados de los ojos.
A menudo se desarrolla en los párpados de los ojos alguna cosa que se asemeja a un crecimiento en su fuerza y dureza, y por eso se llama crecimiento.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelids, both above and below.
Therefore, the operation for them is to observe whether the swelling is occurring in them from something coming out of the eyelid and affecting the entire area; the cause of this is slight.
Therefore, cut over that with an incision through the length, and then look for it in all parts with ease until you find it, and then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you because the ointment from it will heal that and close it up.
And if the swelling is descending into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should examine its interior surface; then raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook or make an incision in it, and press on all sides, and if the eyelid becomes elongated due to the incision, this is not cause for concern.
E at the beginning, wash the eyes with salt water; and treat the area with water that contains herbs until it is healed.
Chapter .10
Of the care for cataracts in the eyelid above the eye.
Cataract is grayish in color and is formed in the tissues of the eyelid above, and it usually affects children, clouding their eyes and causing severe blindness; they cannot look at the bright sunlight because tears constantly flow from them.
And for this reason you see these children constantly squinting, even when they sleep; and their eyelids are wet with tears, which already cover inflammation, and the presence of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel cataract within them.
And some way of operation is that the patient places his head on your lap, and you drape him with a cloth and make a circle around his eye according to the size that contains the cataract from all sides, and then place that circle over the eye and press with your fingers all around so that the cataract is compressed in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that moist area with a sharp knife, making the incision no larger than the incision made in phlebotomy.
"But in the case of the scrotum, it is necessary for you to cut the cord completely until you reach the testicle, because during the most serious processes, pus forms in the testicle through a crack according to the form of white bile.
"Therefore, extract it with the cloth that you have wrapped between your hands, and rotate it between your right and left hand until it is drained.
"And be careful not to push into the crack, so that with the spatula you do not reach the bone and displace it.
"But if pus does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then gently push into the crack until pus is produced; and then extract it as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area and tighten them with bandages.
"And also apply salt and place it in the cavity of the crack so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
"And then care for it until it heals.
"But if a hot abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
"Chapter 11
"On the methods of touching the eye.
"When the eyelids are born with the growth of hair beneath the natural hairs and have aged, these then cause problems for the eye and lead to various illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids, which can result in the destruction of the eye, called 'touching of the eye'. The treatment for this is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or the touching is done by incision and suturing; or with reeds, as I will explain.
"And so it is necessary that you place the patient's head on your lap; then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned back, good; and if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is thread from the other side below the eyelid, and have the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that back with the reed.
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence: And if your tear is close to the natural hairs as it is in the thickness of the king.
And then place the scalpel in one of the two angles of the vulva, and then excise it completely, and then use the thread to bind together the two lips with wool or fine linen thread, and cleanse away the blood, and make adhere whatever excess there is of the threads over two eyebrows with some glue-like substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do not concern yourself.
And then leave the thread sewn for three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without sewing and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its adherence; but sewing is better, and thus I say this, following the ancient taxonomy.
But nevertheless, be careful with the patient, and it is a good procedure, and there should be no fear in doing so.
And there is another way to proceed, and it is that without the figure on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered needles according to this form:
Here's my attempt at translating the given text:
And then closely sew the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for that inside so that it may heal.
But if you encounter an abscess, you should open it or make an incision; then, treat that abscess with a poultice and something similar to it, as well as with ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs are turned around. Then you should use on that what we have said about incision, but suture in each case is more artificial.
To treat with reeds, it is done as follows: And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the shape inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two reeds or two thin slats, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of a finger. And you have already cut at the ends of each division, where you hold the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety above the excess of the eyelid, and tie the reeds of each division tightly, and leave it for a few days, because the cord through tightness will die and turn black and will fall off until by itself it falls out.
If it's too late, then break the skin with scissors, and immediately treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is lifted and the hair does not sting.
And this is how to make two reeds according to this method: and there should be the exact amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter .12
Of plucking stinging hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough, stinging the eyes, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in that thin thread of silk or linen, and then you adjust the ends of it and tie each one in a very fine manner. And let the length of the threads be about the length of a palm.
Then you quickly tie another fine thread under it and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
Then have the patient sit in your seat and let it be near a good light so that your work may be seen clearly, because this is a subtle and delicate operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the plucked hair which needs to be removed, and quickly make it penetrate the eyelid until you extract that one above the natural hair.
And then, pull the hair upwards and insert it into the wax, and there should be one, two, or three hairs, but not more than that.
And then, pull your hand with it to ensure the hair is drawn out and inserted into the wax on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the wax is pulled and the hair is not extracted, you will pull the wax from the sides with the thread that you have prepared for this purpose, until the wax comes out of the upper opening.
And check it with the vision of the eye, because when you pull out the wax and the thread, and everything is clean, close the eye and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and new skin grows over it.
And if the hair is too short, then you take a long hair from the natural ones, and attach it to that one, or leave it until it grows a little longer, and then pull it out.
Chapter XIII
Of the care for removing cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
When cataracts appear in the eye and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it closes, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cauterization, it is called leprosy, and this cataract may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar to their unfortunate condition.
May the manner of the operation on him be that you cut through that hardened part and separate its lips, placing between them a piece of linen cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not fitting that you use treatments on him from those things which dry out and constrain, because if you do this, it will return more inflamed than ever before.
Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with altum (or althaea) seeds and linen fibers, or make a salve of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and submerge the piece of cloth in it, and cure him with that.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce thoroughly everything that is not hardened, according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is only a correction of inflammation that does not return the place to its former condition.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the eyelid below.
This inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid is properly called alxacrati; it can be either natural or accidental.
Certainly! Let's translate the provided text into English line by line:
And the way to perform this operation is for you to take a needle with which you have made double thread, and place that in the flesh. Then make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then gently extend the flesh at the seams with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula. And thus if the shape of the eyelid is restored as needed, it is good; and if not, take the ray and place that on the divided shape, and with that turn the eyelid, making two slits in the side of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two corners of the incision that you have made so that they meet, and let their angle be such that when they come together, the figure of them is made.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda (Λ).
Then raise the skin that amount, which is the length of the sharp edge below it, so that it becomes the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then cure them with the softening medicines and compresses as we have said until it is healed.
And if it becomes necessary to raise the skin by incision, suture, or cautery, then you should make a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate it with the thumb between two lips as we have said.
In the end of the discussion on skin care, whether it is above or below, let the operation proceed accordingly, as prepared for the type of skin, and that is in the form of various spots.
And the wise craftsman always prepares in every possible way within his ability to restore the figure to its natural form, or as close to it as possible, and that patient according to what is convenient for him in the operation and with the greatest care for the instruments.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in some people to the extent that the eyelid is solidly attached to the white of the eye and is prevented from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the tip of a thread under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with wax.
And then you should carefully cut the adhesion with a sharp spatula, which should not be as sharp as regular incisions, having it blunt a little to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation. Remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the wound with its sharpness.
And let your incision be made with the utmost care, ensuring that the adhesion is completely removed until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should put salt water into the wound with which you will wash it; or you can pour in a solution of juniper berries dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the wound using oil, and place cotton soaked in egg white on the wound. On the third day, use consolidative herbs until it heals completely.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh from the tear ducts.
Know that there are two types of nails: one is nerve-related and resembles a thin, hard shell; the other is not nerve-related and resembles white, congealed moisture. When this type affects the tear duct, it is usually taken out with pincers, cut off, and the pincers are not inserted into it.
And both the eyelids close only from the larger tear duct, which gradually covers the vision and blocks light and movement.
But the way to perform the incision is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the tear with the tip of your little finger, extending it towards the top. Then take a needle and insert a horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, or something similar, or strong thread, and double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the tear, and penetrate with the needle, and tie the tear with thread; and extend it towards the top, and scrape off the side of the tear which is the pupil. And thus follow the hair to its end inside.
Then you incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clean the flesh of the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur after the incision.
And sometimes the tear with only one nail extended or with thread, as we have said, and then it should be scraped with a fine spatula, this is its form:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the pattern and words used in the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if the fingernail is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in that place, then many times this type of fingernail is cured with medicine and healed as I have recounted in the division.
And if you want to cut it open, then you should open the wound of the patient and take a thin blade of steel with sharp edge in this manner: With subtlety. And if at times it is rarefied and confused and mixed in that vein, then drip from your hand into the head wound made of cinnamon or with chief rue or with salt crushed, and cover the wound until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on it until everything from him is removed, except for the contrary abscess which may be in the wound; for then you leave that, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The protrusion of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and you cut that from one side, and do not finish the cutting lest you cause a flow of tears.
And then apply a drop of rose oil or something similar to the tear duct until it is healed.
This is the beginning of a new chapter (Capitulo), which in medieval texts often serves as a heading or a section break. In this case, "Capitol .xvii." likely means Chapter XVII or Chapter 17. The text that follows will be related to medical practices or observations pertaining to that specific chapter.
About the incision of alguazardanic and about what is born from flesh adhering in the mouth.
Sometimes in the mouths of some people, red flesh is born, and it is placed over the pupil until it covers it, or it presses close to the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids towards the outside, appearing similar to a rose blossom.
However, the operation on it is that the patient puts his head on your lap; then you open the mouth of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors or forceps; and then cut the flesh at its beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to let that fall from your hand during the operation.
And your incision should be made with the instrument with which we have described for the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to the form that follows in this chapter.
Here's the translation of your sentence:
Based on the pattern you've established, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
Capitulum XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the eye.
Pus comes from veins that are swollen over the eye and prevents the eyelid from performing its function, causing the eye to close for several days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the eye in which there is pus is strong and there is no other ailment besides pus; then you should collect that pus.
And you must command the patient to place their head on your chest, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle gold, like this:
Or let there be one or two ounces gradually in the form of a body like this:
Then those veins should be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and the blood should be absorbed little by little until you see that the veins are removed from the eye and they roll back.
And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are confident in your operation so that you do not incise anything except those veins.
"And when you have completed [the procedure], then you pour vinegar or wine onto the head for its sharpness will dissolve what has been removed from the liver.
"But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that moment, then you bandage everything with what alleviates the pain of the patient, and leave them thus for some days until their pain subsides and they are safe from pus forming.
"And then you repeat on the patient according to the same method until they are healed.
"And this is the shape of the forceps:
"Chapter XIX.
"On reducing protrusions in the nose.
"When you treat protrusions with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the previously described method and it does not heal, do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the swelling until it reaches maturity, and extract all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
"And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
"And it is named a sharp hook, made of iron, with a rounded head like this, which should be punctated by file or finely crafted points (as shown in the following illustration).
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And this is done several times, and then restore the area with desiccating and hemostatic agents.
Therefore, if the area is healed and good flesh has grown there, and the body has been cleansed of infection and it remains so for forty days, and it does not recur or become inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the task is not to cure it but rather to reduce the cleft to the shape of the nose, and this is how you do it: first, expose the bone using either an iron instrument or a sharp medicine, and once the bone has been exposed, then take a file of this kind:
The tip of the file should be triangular, and its shaft should first be thinned towards the tip in this way: as you see here.
Then place that on the bone, and it should be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little towards the cheek, and then roll your hand with the file until it penetrates all the way to the bone, and this allows the patient to feel better as they begin to expel wind through their hand.
Therefore, restore the area with hemostatic and desiccating medicines, as has been shown to you.
When the flesh is numb and the area hardened, then the substance that had spread to the outside parts returns to the nose, which makes it easier on the patient.
**Chapter 20.**
**On the reduction of the prominence of the lip.**
When the lip protrudes completely and no damage or decrease occurs during treatment, it is necessary to release the patient, then follow them, and place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification for good suction; and then place a liniment on the lip made of acacia, aloe, sesame, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the lip with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is to take many linen cloths, and each cloth should be folded into four layers; and make many of them.
Then place these one on top of the other according to the amount that the lip requires. Then strengthen them with a hard cloth and strong compression; and reapply the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the lip compressed day and night.
And if during this time the ligament has become softened, then it is necessary for it to be very tight.
And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the wound has already healed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with the powders and the tightening and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the uveal tunica's prominence.
When there is a rupture in the uveal tunica, and it protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and it resembles the shape of a man due to this, and you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from below towards above, and then place another needle in which there is double thread from the lacrimal part, and make this penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea around the needle, and tighten this very much.
Here's my translation of the sentence:
And then care for the eye with water that comforts the inside until the wound is healed.
And sometimes all around the eye with a cloth ring, adjusting it tightly; then pierce it with a fine needle so that the fluid drains from the eye, and let the fluid flow down the white of the eye, and lower the eye and insert it immediately afterwards.
And then strengthen (the eye) until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
About the care of alconati (possibly a misspelling or variant of "alcanati," which might refer to a specific medical condition or part of the body).
This disease, which is called alconati, is nothing other than water that descends on the eye and is not that (i.e., it's not what people might think it is).
But the way to treat it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, and then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you see the water coming to the lower parts, and then dry it so that it does not descend further, and block the light, and the patient will see the causes as they are.
And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water (i.e., the condition is not serious or harmful).
Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
When it is forgotten (or left out), then you should distill into the nose warm water in which you have mixed honey or warm water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
About the treatment of water descending from the nose.
As we have said before, there are different types of water that can be divided and categorized based on what is appropriate for treatment, which will be discussed in the following sections according to health needs.
Then it is necessary for you to sit the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a bandage.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their nose if the nose with water is the left one, or with your right hand if it is the right one.
And then with your right hand take aloes if the nose is left; or with your left hand if the nose is right.
And then place the tip of the aloes near the corner of the eye by the size of a ray in the lower part of the nose closer to the smaller tear duct, and immediately peel off the aloes with skill and turn your hand with it.
And then enter into the mouth of the wound and feel that pus has already arrived due to view.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of pus to the bone be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the crown of the wound; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal membrane the vision of the wound.
Then place the pus in the location where there is water, and then you throw it down once, then another time, and if the water descends quickly, then see the patient over what he can see immediately, and pus in its wound.
Then wait a little while; then if the water has descended, you should place that other time before the pus is expelled.
And thus, when it is dried and does not descend, then you can extract the pus easily, and you rotate it a little with your hand, and then dissolve a small amount of pure salt in water and wash the inside of the wound with that; and then place outside the wound a piece of cotton or wool soaked in olive oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
"However, we and those of our time use egg white on that cumin powder.
"And if your patient does not comply with the treatment of oil due to its harshness—for there are some people whose constitution is very resistant to it—then you should take the salve which is called alberid, and this is its composition:
"Therefore, pierce that joint with it, and do not press your hand into the wound, except to make a subtle path for the medicine.
"Then insert the medicine as we have said.
"And you must complete your work by preparing a quiet, darkened room for the patient to sleep in on their back, and they should be prevented from all movements.
"And place under the nature of the patient something that will make their condition milder, and do not move the head to the right or left at all.
"And let the treatment be administered according to the patient's disposition for three days.
"Then release the patient into that darkened room and expose them to cool air, and make them see some objects, and then resume the treatment within seven days.
And it is not necessary that you do this during the time of the treatment or immediately after the injection. It is important that you remove this because the water may slightly increase due to a strong and intense reaction.
However, if an abscess forms, then it is necessary that you release the pus after seven days, and correct this with water to make the abscess soften.
Then you should cover his face and place an oral cloth over it so that his vision is directed downwards for a few days, keeping him in the darkest place possible.
And then he should be gradually removed from that darkness and returned to his usual habits.
And know that in surgery, the student is not exempt from some observations, and then you should be prepared for the procedure.
And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and some say that he made fire in the Ayrac (airway) by perforating it with which water is drawn out.
However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has achieved this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of Magdaan that should be applied to those who are ignorant of them.
And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and their ends should be sharpened with this subtlety to form a triangle, with the pointed end being the shape as described.
Chapter 24.
About the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When different kinds of flesh are born in the nose, resembling the sting of a scorpion or a polyp, and this ailment is called a polyp because it resembles that fish. And if the flesh is cancerous, or gray in color, then it is a lion's flesh, not gray in color.
Therefore, in this type of lion's flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, the patient should sit between your hands and be placed in the sunlight, and you should wash his nose, and pick out your ounce in those fleshes. Then extract it from the divided parts, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any remains of it for some reason by which the cutting is possible, then you should scrape it away with one of the subtle instruments with ease until none of it remains. Here's the translation of the given text:
Based on the provided text and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate this line by line: If the nose is open and from it moisture enters the palate, then know that he has already been healed.
However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that there is nothing but flesh inside him in the upper parts of the nose, to which an abscess has not yet come.
Therefore, it is necessary to insert a thread into the nose, to which some wax has been attached; and place nuts between each nut the size of a finger or less, and instruct the patient to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a reed or another instrument that is available to him.
And after he has done this, let him pull the thread until it reaches the passages of the nose, and comes out on his throat; for often children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for anyone who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside it; and then administer a meat hook with nuts that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the meat is already with the nuts on the thread.
And then extract the bile, and place in the nose near the bloodletting a funnel, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely dissolved everything that is rotten in the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer to use a different method, you can use that one instead.
And this is the shape of the tool for the nasal purger with which oils and medications are distilled into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open lamp, with a small bowl and the mouthpiece similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a reed, and the tip of the nasal purger should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle on its end, with which you can hold it when you blow into it oil or water that you want from the juices and absorbable causes.
It seems like you are referring to a medieval medical text, potentially written in an old version of a Romance language or possibly Old French. Here's a line-by-line translation attempt for "Capitol .xxv." based on the context provided:
"From the nails that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
And for this, it is necessary that you introduce it at the beginning of their appearance, and then describe everything. Then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that was in its place.
But if the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has become hardened, dark in color, and with little sensation. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it is a crancous abscess; for many times it happens that he who incises this abscess suffers great harm to the one on whom he performs it.
And if the abscess is of a gentle touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible in all cases, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the Suturing of the Nose and Lips and of the Ear when Continuity is Lost Due to Injury or Similar Cause.
Know that when there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilaginous areas, you will perform this operation only on some people.
When you need to treat any of these causes, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then care for it until it heals.
And if the edges of the separation are already separated and each is healed, then you should carefully scrape each edge until blood comes out. Then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of that sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and finely chopped herbs. Place a thin layer of emplastrum diapecos or another consolidating emplaster over the powder, and let it lie for two or three days, then remove it and replace the emplaster, leaving it until the threads break by themselves, and then care for it with ointment until it heals.
However, the method of stitching is that you close the separation with needles as we have described in the stitching of the abdomen, or close the separation with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII
About the removal of that cause which appears in both lips in the inner parts.
Many times it happens to many men in the inner parts of their lips there appear hard lumps resembling pigeon droppings, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips and folds each of those hardnesses completely, and then fill the place with lard until the bleeding stops, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
It is not uncommon to find flesh attached to the gums, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or whatever you have with the scissors and incise it along its length, letting the pus or blood flow out.
And then place on the spot lard or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, for after cauterization it will not return.
Chapter 29.
For tooth pain with a fever.
When on the surface of the teeth, both inside and out, and between the gums there are rough scabs that are hard and sometimes blackened, and they are made yellow or green until the gum becomes corrupt and the teeth become loose.
Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and rest his head on your lap, scrape the teeth where those scabs appear and make them look like sand until none of their causes remain, and thus remove the blackness, the yellowness, and the other discolorations until they are cleansed.
So if that has been removed as described at the beginning of the treatment, then it is good; but if not, you must repeat the treatment on those teeth for another day and the second and third days until it reaches the final outcome that you desire.
Know that teeth require many rasps of various shapes and sizes according to your operation's preparation. And for this reason, the rasp used to scrape from the inside of the tooth is different from the one used between teeth, according to other shapes. Therefore, these forms of rasps must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Chapter 30
Of tooth extraction.
Instruct that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay any extraction as much as possible, because there is no reason to rush its removal once it is extracted, since it is a vital substance until it is removed from the body.
But when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain, because often the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth. If you extract that tooth, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this happen due to the actions of barbers.
Therefore, when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and you know it well, then you should scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until the gum is separated from the tooth on all sides. Then make the incision carefully with your instruments, or with fine forceps little by little until you reach the tooth.
Then speak to him strongly with great words or strong language, and place the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that it covers all parts with ease and exerts pressure to remove the object as was done at first.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then it is necessary for you to fill that cavity with cloth and tightly fasten it with a thin ray so that it will not break during your constriction of it with tongs.
And it is necessary for you to work very carefully with scarification around the entire circumference of the gum and be careful not to break or split it, otherwise return to the patient for an even greater evil than his first pain.
And beware of doing what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity when they extract teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great evils to come upon sick men that are more difficult than they can handle, and the roots of them all, or some of those, or that you might extract that with some bones of the jaw as well, just as many times we have testified.
And before removing it, his mouth should be washed with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
And if there is bleeding through this, like many small openings, then sprinkle some powder on the wound and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and delicate pliers with which the tooth is first removed should be of a long handle and short shaft, thick for this reason: that they may not be bent when you are using them.
And the handles should be so thick that when tightened with those they are not bent, but short at the tip.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the tip, and at the tips of those there should be teeth which interlock with each other and are strongly tightened by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these should be in the shape of a heron’s beak, which is hooked, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
About the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken, there are some reasons for this. Then you should place a cushion with padding over the area for one or two days until the area is softened; and afterwards introduce pliers or tweezers, the tips of which are similar to the beak of a bird called a heron or stork, in the form of forceps:
The given text appears to be from a medieval medical treatise written in Occitan, an old Romance language that was widely spoken in southern France and parts of Italy during the Middle Ages. Here’s a line-by-line translation into English:
And if the patient does not obey you and is restless with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary for you to cut into the flesh and strip away all the meat, and introduce the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever, the form of which is this:
And it should have a short, thick end, and not be blunt to prevent it from slipping.
Therefore, if the cut is pierced in this way, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular tip, with some thickness on it:
The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and with a finer tip.
And already having been helped by this instrument, which has two ramps, the shape is approximately like this: and with other instruments that will be used for the rasping of teeth; because first it is done with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and this is its shape:
with a twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness, and not be blunt to prevent slipping.
And know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar and similarly shaped as the other instruments.
Here's the translation for the first source sentence:
Based on the provided lines and the similarity to medieval Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence into English while maintaining the original structure and language use:
And if there is any swelling in the patient, reduce it gradually and hold or contain it with the mouth so that it does not increase or spread until the bone of the whole (area) is healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
But if there is a slight sore on the bone, then scrape off that sore and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
**Chapter XXXII.**
**On the care of protruding teeth over others.**
**When the teeth are protruding and do not follow their natural shape, especially when they are directed towards women, particularly older and venerable ones; therefore, you should consider: if one tooth is close to another and cannot be pulled or leveled off, then extract it; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise it with this instrument, the form of which is like a pig's snout, and let it be made of very sharp Indian iron.**
**And your incision should be made over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, so that another tooth is not affected.**
"And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing down, then file it with an Indian iron file of this shape:
"And it should all be made of Indian iron; and it should have very small points like those found on files used for making needles. The tooth should be filed little by little over many days with care, so that another tooth is not also affected and lost. "Then smooth that edge at the end, and scrape it with various scrapers.
"And if it is a tooth whose edge has been chipped and bothers the tongue, then you should file that edge so that its roughness is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
"Chapter XXXIII.
"On the restoration of missing teeth with a gold or silver file.
"When the front teeth have been knocked out or removed by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew properly with what remains, and you have treated him with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then for that reason place artificial teeth in those spaces using gold rather than silver, because silver turns black and quickly deteriorates over several days, whereas gold never changes.
The text seems to describe a procedure involving a thin and thick substance (possibly oil or another liquid) applied between the teeth. Here's a line-by-line translation: And then proceed by inserting the needle into the beginning of that part, and strengthen your hand with skill and agility so that it is not shaken.
And let your grip be firm on the needle with which you strengthen the ties, ensuring the teeth do not loosen.
And then cut off the excess threads with scissors or forceps, and add those to each area skillfully, turning them and hiding them between the healthy tooth and the injured one, so as not to cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it thus tightly bound like this.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner at all times.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the configuration of the connection of two healthy teeth and two injured ones, as you see these tied:
And when one or two teeth are to be returned to their place, then properly position each one in its location, and let them grow again as we have described, so that they may heal.
And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bone of a cow for this purpose, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
This appears to be the chapter number or title of the text, similar to how modern texts use "Chapter X" or "Section Y". It's not a full sentence meant for translation into English. Instead, it likely serves as a heading or reference point for the medical treatise. Therefore, no direct translation is needed as it functions more like a label than a complete thought.
"In the case of a complaint that affects the tongue and prevents speaking.
"This complaint that appears below the tongue sometimes is natural with which one is born, or it is accidental and happens due to a wound that has already healed.
"And the operation on it is that you should open the mouth of the patient, with his head inclined towards you; and raise his tongue, then proceed to cut this nerve complaint until the tongue is freed from its tension.
"But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has happened due to the healing of a wound, then you should pour oil and cut through until you have cut the complaint and the knot has been dissolved.
"And be careful that there is not a tear in the flesh and that you do not cut any blood vessel, causing blood to flow.
"Then clean the traces of the incision with vinegar, or with hot water, or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth beneath the tongue. This is the method that you should use to keep the patient's mouth open every night so that it does not become hardened again.
If there is a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with an old cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And continue to care for him with other remedies until he is cured.
Chapter .xxxv.
To extract a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an abscess resembling a small bag, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is greatly enlarged until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth sitting in front of the light and look at the abscess.
And if you see it as dark in color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch it because it is gangrenous.
And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert a lance into it and cut it with a fine scalpel, and divide it from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place powdered zegi (which is vitriol) on it until the bleeding stops.
And quickly return to your work before you have completed it with him, before he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that [wound] with the other remedy until he is healed.
**Chapter 36.**
**On the removal of an abscess from both ears and from the throat, as well as other abscesses.**
When an abscess appears in the throat like cotton, which are called glands that swell outside and are named tonsils, if you treat them with the water we mentioned in the section and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive. In such a case, do not touch it with an iron [instrument].
But if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron due to the flow of blood; rather, leave it until it has ripened, and then either you will pierce it, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, painful, and its root is thin, then this is the one that should be cut open.
The operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already subsided completely with rest or if it has diminished somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be turned to his right side, and open his mouth wide, and the servant taking hold of his tongue between his hands presses it downwards with an instrument that is very fine in form.
And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be thin like a knife.
So when you press on the tongue with it and an abscess appears, and you catch it with your clothing, then take a needle and insert it into the abscess, and pull it out as much as you can towards the outside. Another thing that draws something from the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument of this shape:
Another thing that draws something from the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument of this shape: and it resembles forceps, but the tips of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in the middle of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spoon of this shape: and let it be sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have incised one abscess, incise the other in the same manner, and then the patient will heal from the cold water.
But if there is bleeding, heal with water of decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar to the causes that are hemostatic until the blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
Sure, let's break down this sentence and translate it line by line:
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess that was located in her throat, which abscess tended to be of a dark color and caused little pain, and it had already closed her throat, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had forbidden her from eating and drinking water, and she would have died within one or two days if she had persisted.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had formed two openings through which it drained.
So I cauterized one of the openings with a hot iron and removed it, and a large piece came out with it. Then I cut that opening until I reached the other opening, and then I closed her mouth, pressed her tongue down, and inserted the hot iron into the abscess.
And then I removed a large portion of it, and only a little blood came out of it. Therefore, her throat was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately and then started eating food. Since I did not stop cutting away at that abscess many times for a long time, another abscess appeared in its place, which I cut until it extended along the entire length of it.
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
Based on the pattern from your previous example, I would guess that this means "Chapter 37.
Of the incision of a boil when it is ripe.
When the boil is deep in the skin and is ripe and long, it is called a perpendicular incision. And if it is in the fatty tissue, it is called a bubo.
But when it is healed with the water that we mentioned in the division, and you do not complete your treatment, and if the boil is cauterized already and is subtle, then you should incise it as if it were round; and if it is of that length, and it is bloody, dark or black, and it does not feel good to the touch, then you should attempt to incise it, because in this there is danger for the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have described its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of the same form, and then place the thumb on the new boil, pull it down and incise it with one of the two instruments mentioned in the incision of a nipple.
And it is necessary that you not introduce anything into [the patient] except what is appropriate for the natural opening without addition, because if you introduce too much, you will obstruct their speech.
And for the insertion, use that which we recommend for the insertion of two needles, and ensure that it enters until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the insertion, it is necessary to use ingenuity in cauterizing him without fear. The method of cautery on him is only with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, and then take the water we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make it live with that cause, and place it not too thick or too thin, and with that fill the cavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and let the patient drink from his own side so that saliva or mucus comes out of his mouth due to the introduced medicine, so that nothing falls onto his throat and it does not descend into him.  (Note: The phrase "de aquela deguna causa" is a bit uncertain, as the exact meaning of "deguna" in this context isn't clear. It could mean something like "any reason" or "any cause," but without more context, it's hard to say for sure.)
And then take the medicine in your hand and squeeze it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it is darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray [probably referring to a medical instrument], and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a tube until the cotton adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the desired cauterization of the grape, and then leave it there so that it will dry out and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to reapply the medicine, reapply it, and after cauterization, clean around the grape with cotton soaked in cold water, rinse with that water, then wash with warm water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with gargles until it is healed.
And this type of cure is more reliable and longer lasting.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it can be cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried arabic gum, chamomile, borage, and similar herbs. Mix all these ingredients, or some of them, in a pot, and let them soak in vinegar. Then boil the mixture; the pot should be well-luted with luting clay. In the middle of the pot, there should be a small hole, over which you place a concave instrument made of silver or iron like this:
And if you need to intervene by inserting the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula and covers it, until the uvula is well covered.
And then you should repeat this process on the other visible moles until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess formation, as it would cause too much pressure on the abscess, which is undesirable. Instead, you should wait for the declaration of the abscess by a cautious physician.
But if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and make a closed end from an egg at the extremity of it, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the closed end of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the removal of thorns and of water that sticks in the throat, and of other causes.
Many visible things stick in the throat or a spine of a fish or any other cause.
Therefore, you must extract the water that is visible from these things, on which the sight falls, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
And that which is not visible and hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has settled in the stomach, because when the cause linked to the throat is expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or a radish of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge seaweed and mix it strongly with honey, then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns, it will be expelled. And take an eel and mix it with honey, and place it inside the mouth and make sure it is extracted when swallowing; or take a leek and place it in the throat and then remove it by sucking.
But if they are not expelled with those causes that we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument of this shape:
And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at the end of it there should be a concavity that you can insert into his throat easily.
And he should lift his head up, and you must ensure that the contact of his throat bones is such that it reaches the body and peels off the bone or thorn, or what this physician does with his hand.
Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
Chapter XXXIX
About the extraction of blood-sucking leeches attached to the throat.
When treating the blood-sucking leech with water as described in the division of treatment with medicines and not with cautery, consider then in the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have compressed the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned to you.
Therefore, if you see the blood-sucking leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers carefully.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking leech is dead and separates from the throat) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
Then take a full bladder of cold water and open the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, and move the water back and forth with your hand for an hour, because the blood-sucking leech, as soon as it feels the water, catches.
"But if it has not been forgotten with that which we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
"Do this, so that it may happen; in whatever way it falls.
"And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take a vessel filled with ignited charcoal and cover the vessel with a lid, through which there is a hole; fit the extremity of the instrument into this hole. Then place the vessel over the patient's head. The patient should place his mouth on the extremity of the canula (reed), and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the vein, because the blood will soon fall.
"And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure the patient does not drink, but only eat salted and dry food, and do not drink water. And it is necessary that with this treatment the patient will be cured.
"And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the neck vein is performed when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Capítulo 40
Which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are different species, of many kinds, according to how they are remembered, each one in this book.
And they are different in their piercing and incision according to two methods: one by the type of abscess itself, and the other by what we understand about their humidity.
And the second method is according to the places in the body where they occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from one in a joint; and each has its own treatment for operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be pierced until the pus in them has matured or reached its completion.
So there are other abscesses that should be pierced when they are fresh and not yet matured according to their nature, such as abscesses near the joints, because an abscess that is close to a joint extends its existence until it can reach what is around it, and quickly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay piercing it until it has matured in the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore pierce it while it is unripe; and it should not be pierced raw, with undigested matter, except that which is near the buttocks, so that its pus does not spread and extend to the inner parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula or an unhealed wound in its term. But you should know that the time for piercing the abscess is when it has matured.
And know that it is matured when there is the subsidence of pain and fever, and also the decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and the acuity of the abscess head, and other signs.
And this is why you should know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess and from where pus can drain easily.
And puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms or soles of the feet, and in areas of the arms, cords of the nerves, and armpits; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to leave the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the rules we have mentioned; because if you puncture before that, the body of pus and much filth are prolonged, and the edges of the abscess become hardened and deep.
"But some apostemas (abscesses) are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body, as necessary, or according to what the affected member requires.
"And it is necessary to administer a small perforation in smaller abscesses, and in larger ones, a large and wide opening or multiple incisions, depending on the size of the abscesses.
"Other abscesses are of those in which it is necessary to make a concave cut and incise, when done thus that the pain subsides, as happens with trophic ulcers and buboes.
"And there are those that are incised with a three-sided section; and of these is the one that is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the inguinal region.
"And there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to the previous ones.
"But in those cases where it is not possible (to administer a specific section), such as superficial lion abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.
"And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you perforate it and do not be concerned with extracting all of the matter in that moment; having extracted a portion from it, then seal the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to degree until it is fully emptied.
And especially if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in decrepitude, because the vital spirit often departs with the discharge of blood, and the patient dies easily, and you open (them).
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if in the abscess a part of the intestine or skin has been cut off, then you should fill it with clean wool or thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have wounds or cuts, without moisture; and strengthen that for three days; and then proceed to treat and cure it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding during the operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which mulberry leaves have been steeped, and place a linen cloth soaked with this mixture over the area of the bleeding several times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and treatments and use powders that have been recommended in many places in this book and in other sections.
But if it is in the winter and the area of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should soak wool in vinegar and hot oil and place them over the areas.
And if it is in the summer and the areas are fleshy, then you should place wool soaked in water and oil or vinegar and oil over them, and keep everything cold until the third day, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed. 》
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of all abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already explained about every abscess in which way is the path of its cure specifically by chapters.
Chapter .41.
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck are small abscesses, and these are of two types: nodules that contain tunicates on their surface; and the types of these are many.
And of them are boils, and among those are ones that contain moisture similar to pus. And of those are the ones that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and among those are the ones that are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all these, and in the removal of them there is no fear, because the removal of them does not cause opposition to archery.
And the operation in the incision of these is that you should probe them with an instrument whose form will be described below, which is called a trepan; until you know what it contains.
Because if what it contains is moisture, then you should incise it with a longitudinal incision by means of a surface incision in this manner:
And it begins with the incision from line B to line G. When the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, because too many views return if anything remains of it.
And then you should submerge the cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water with salt; fill the wound with it and let it sit for another day, because with water you will corrode everything that remains of that layer.
And then apply more Egyptian ointment over the cotton, rubbing and polishing it if necessary, until you are confident that no trace of that layer remains; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this manner: with a cut in the shape of a cross, and make an incision between two lips of the cut and scrape it from all sides, and apply your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if you encounter resistance with the incision, then do what I have told you earlier.
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving an abscess or boil (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Certainly! Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
And stop the perforation of those at the lowest part for relief of the body from illness in the lower parts.
And then care for those with water that is appropriate for healing.
Chapter .42.
On the incision of scrofula occurring in the neck.
Often these tumors appear in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
And those that occur in the neck, and most of which are engendered among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, just as in the nodes and tumors of the head, as we have recounted.
The types of these scrofula are many, for some of them are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see is of good constitution in the touch, whose visible color is close to the color of the tendon, and is smooth on all sides, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the arteries, and is not hard, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial incision from above to below the body of the line of G to between the lines of B, and cleanse all around, and extend two lips of the tendon with an ounce, or with many ounces if you need them, as we have said in the tumors of the head, and draw it out little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp so that you do not harm yourself with a cut, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or an artery and prevent yourself from continuing your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders that stop bleeding, bind the wound, and allow it to rest so that the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood has been shed.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then ask with the index finger if there is any other cause of scrofula, then cut and clean those as well.
And if the scrofula is near a large vein, it is then necessary that you do not cut the scrofula from its root. Before that, it is necessary to ligate it tightly with a double ligature and leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you excise that whole scrofula, then you should close the two lips of the wound immediately with stitches so that no superfluity remains.
However, if you see that there is still superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary for you to understand how to excise its root, and extract it, and administer a stitch, as has been said.
And those scrofulas that contain moisture should be perforated with a shallow perforation here at the place of their maturation, and place the perforation so that the pus drains from the bottom, as we have said.
And then apply an ointment similar to this one, for the purpose of corroding what remains of the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter .43
On the incision of the pustule caused by an abscess in the groin.
The ancients said that this incision should be made on the pustule, but I have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
And this is the writing of their speech.
But in men who have a scrotal hernia, the removal of the intestine should be avoided because through this method it cannot be healed, since all the veins and major vessels of the patient are located here.
But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is necessary to use the cutting of the intestine to avoid the loss that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the intestine below three circles of the intestinal circles, or four with a small incision in length between two circles for size, so that the incision is in the fat, not in the cartilage. This place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
And if the doctor is timid, then he should extend the tongue with tongs, and then split the tongue until it reaches the pharynx, but avoid the blood vessels if any of them are seen.
Then cut the uvula as we have recommended; and it is indicated for the cutting of the pharynx by the flame that comes from this, which disrupts speech and causes loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour arrives at which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the sheath to the wound, and sew it shut without using a needle.
Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of what we have recounted is nothing but this: see that some of these tumors have already taken the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his soul has dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the place of the wound for some breathing, and is saved from death.  />
And for this reason, I command that the wound be left open until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and it is malignant for three days; and then I command that the wound be sewn up, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I myself have seen is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat, cutting off a piece of the lung's pipe with it; and I was called to care for her, and found the woman as if she were dead, and discovered the wound and found blood flowing from the wound in small amounts.
Based on the provided context and the similarity of the language to medieval Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And do not reprimand the servant unless they speak in a hoarse voice, and after about a few days, return to their usual duties.
And now I say that in the case of an epileptic seizure, there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
When a swelling occurs on the gullet outside, it is called a hernia of the gullet.
This swelling named hernia of the gullet is a large swelling according to the body's color and is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And the natural one is not difficult to cure.
And the accidental one is of two kinds: the first is like large knots, and the second kind is like a swelling caused by constriction of an artery, which is dangerous. And it is not advisable to apply pressure to it with an iron only in the case where it is small. And you should examine it and investigate it with your hand, and if you find that it is like large knots and not connected to any of the veins, then you should incise it as you would a knot, and extract it with water containing linseed and bursiclam; but if not, then you should carefully consider its entire being, and afterwards cure the area with appropriate healing water until it is healed.
It appears that this is a chapter heading rather than a full sentence. Chapter headings are typically brief and serve as titles or indicators of what the section will discuss. In this case, "Capitol .xlv." likely means "Chapter 45," indicating that we have reached the forty-fifth chapter in the text.
"On the cutting of the various types of nodes.
"There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
"And it is necessary that I explain the difference between a node and an excrescence, as there may be doubt.
"So I say that in the case of an excrescence, there is heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess liquid subsides; and when the process of putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
"But in the case of a node, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I tell you that this is called 'leon' in the proper language.
"And it is according to the color of the body; and its beginning is like a bean, and it is made in this way, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I will say in the division.
"So it is necessary that when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you probe it and inquire about its beginning with the instrument called 'intromes,' as its form will be described in the following chapter.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then measure your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the contents and observe what has emerged from it.
And if there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should cut it open with a shallow incision, as mentioned for other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the contents, know that it is pus.
And place over it a dressing in the shape of a cross like this: just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a hook, and carefully peel off the skin from all around, and keep the hair or bag, if possible, on top of that, and draw out the pus with the scoop.
However, if it bursts during the operation, it is not possible to draw out that pus, and you should watch closely for this, and then you should extract it bit by bit until nothing remains of it.
Because if any part of it remains, either a little or a lot, the pus will return according to its nature.
And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place over it a tight bandage to prevent another abscess from forming, and treat it as described until it is healed.
And if the need is great, then you should sew up both lips of the patient and treat them with water that heals.
But if the vein is pulsatile or non-pulsatile, then you should cauterize and fill the spot with powdered vitriol, and leave it for two days or three until the wound improves and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cut what remains of the need.
Chapter 46.
On the shapes of the instrument necessary for incision and perforation.
The forms of the instruments are three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, with curved ends to fit well in the holes.
And these are the forms of the hooks, and they are named "albered," and one of them is called "berid.
And there are three kinds: one is large, another is medium-sized, and another is small.
"The shape of great experience, his form:
"The shape of moderate experience, his form.
"The shape of little experience, his form.
"Therefore, it is appropriate for these to be treated with those poultices, exits, and fistulas, because of the bones among them and other causes.
"And they are made round, thick, like lions, and also with large needles with which the saddles are sewn, and they are made of copper wire or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of copper wire.
"And they are made with black feathers by experienced persons, who know that through these openings the fistulas in the hollow of which they lie should be opened, so that they may be reflected back into their proper places by their lightness.
"And they are of three kinds, because some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
"The form of great experience with lead:
"The form of moderate experience with lead:
"The shape of small experience with lead:
"The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of them is made an ointment, and it is of three spices.
And from those is made an ointment having two curves, and it is of three spices.
And from them comes an ointment with three curves, and it is made of three spices.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a simple small ointment, its form is as follows:
The form of a large ointment having two curves: The form of a medium-sized ointment having two curves. The form of a small ointment with two curves.
The form of a large ointment with three curves.
The form of a medium-sized ointment with three curves.
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are made of three spices, because from them come large, medium, and small ones.
"Form of large scalpel
"Form of a medium-sized scalpel
"Form of a small scalpel
"The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the other ends are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve during the excavation of the nodes, so that the patient may be healed and find some relief from the heat caused by the excavation of the abscess.
"And these are the forms of scalpels, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
"They are made of iron and resemble a ray, with which a collyrium is made.
"And it is in the sharpened end that is concealed with a spatula, and on that one goes towards the divided parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
"The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the aforementioned for the perforation of abscesses and which patients do not feel, come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of blisters with which blood flow is cut off are of three types: large, medium, and small.
They should be made of ram's horn, round with some length, and should be subtle.
And you should have these three types of blisters — large, medium, and small — so that you can quickly cut off the blood flow when necessary, especially in cases where medicine is not initially effective.
However, do not use them to cut off blood flow in all parts of the body; use them only on fleshy parts, such as the thighs and buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and shins, or similar fleshy places.
And sometimes these tools are made in the form of small vessels similar to surgical scissors, with which blood is cut off when done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round like this:
Chapter XLVII
From the care of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Some men's breasts become swollen; you should advise them to sleep on their backs when they begin to grow. And as the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, they are often inflamed and itchy.
And when this happens, it is necessary to incise those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then remove all the grossness, and then fill the wound with a red medicament, and then sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and cure him until he is healed.
But if the breast becomes soft and flaccid like a woman's, then cut it into two halves along its upper part with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form between the lines of B and G. And then remove the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and take away the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you have not completely healed the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cotton swab soaked in corrosive ointment and let it soak until the wound is clean from the fat, and then cure what has been cleansed so that it may heal.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the piercing of abscesses, which is called lancing.
These abscesses that are called lancing are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus that is black.
And of these, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be lanced with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when everything is evacuated that is in the abscess from the flesh, then you fill it with old cotton and let it sit until the next day.
And then the cotton should be removed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or scrofula, then you should cut it open in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
If the wound is extended such that it may cause suppuration, then administer a cautery to them as we have previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or venom.
When the arrow is broken and the string that is on it is tightened, then many inflamed abscesses occur. And the signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to archery, it is long drawn in the front of the body; and when you prick the abscess with the aforementioned things, you will feel in him what is called stridor.
And that which is due to vein is round at the front of the body.
And the incision of this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
But in those that are due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, make an incision in the string along its length; and afterwards widen the incision with hooks near the arrow, and free it from the tunic until it is uncovered.
Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
And then puncture the area that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood in it comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which powder is generated until the ligaments fall out, and then treat that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a cut vein, then you should have water nearby as much as possible of the abscess with a rope, and then insert the needle under the area that you had under your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread until you draw it out from the other side, and then bandage the abscess well according to what I have told you in the binding of grape leaves on two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then insert a thin thread with the same needle throughout all of the abscess until the initial incision of the needle, and strengthen these threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part until when it has drained what is inside it, then you incise the excess of the rope and leave what is bound to it.
And then place on the patient's wound the one you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with calcined materials and ointments until they are healed.
Chapter 1 on the abscess which occurs due to a twist of nerves.
So it happens that an abscess occurs in the bowel and in the vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or excessive labor on them, by resemblance.
And it is most common in the areas of the ankles or the sole, or in any place where the joints are aggravated.
And it is a severe abscess, resembling the color of other parts of the body, and it is most prevalent in those who lack their natural dispositions, and when it is narrow with intensity, the patient feels something like numbness.
And the abscess is not collected in the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is affected in all parts but does not go to the parts before or after it.
Therefore, for those who have abscesses in their joints, it is not advisable to be filled with iron, because very quickly they will contract a fever.
But he who is in the head or forehead, treat him with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then cut that one out with scissors and incise it carefully.
And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and excoriate it, and immediately remove it; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 2
On the incision of an abscess which occurs in the area where the intestine is located at the stomach.
It happens to many men who are observed in their stomachs and other parts of their bodies those which are called fungals by similarity with mushrooms, the cause of which is subtle but the head of it is large; and already the lips of them are turned outward, and they are of those which are small, and they are very magnificent.  (Note: The translation for "funguals" could also be "mushroom-like" or "fungus-like".)
And I have already seen one, and in his stomach there were two things which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small cause.
And already the lips of those were turned outward and they split, and moisture ran from that all the time.
When I cut into them, I found one with eighteen punctures and the other with six punctures.
And the operation in their incision is that you should consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you should incise with a spatula lat, and there should be cauteries present in the fire, because many times you must expel much blood from it; and if the blood comes out, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, be careful not to incise with iron; but rather take freshly made lead ointment, and strengthen with that abscess, in the manner we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the tightening of the lead thread; then, do not stop strengthening the large lead on the abscess until it is burst and falls out by itself without effort.
But if the abscess is of great size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut open most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for that person until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut open that which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and shows little regard, for that is also cancer.
And I will come back with the memory of crab close to this.
Chapter 52.
About the treatment of swelling at the navel.
Swelling at the navel is caused by several things: either by breaks in the skin that is on the belly, from which the intestine or intestines come out as happens in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery, as has been said before; or by trapped wind.
But if it is due to a break in the skin and the coming out of the intestines, then the color of the swelling will be similar to that of the body; it is without pain, and soon appears in various places. And if it is due to the coming out of the intestines, then the swelling will be more varied and stronger than what we have said, and when you press on it, it seems hidden, and soon returns; it is also very light, and very much desires baths and strong work.
"But if due to moisture, then it is a lion and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
"And if it is due to blood, then the appearance of the abscess will be blackening.
"But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is serious, large and hard, and fixed in quantity.
"But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it feels like a lion [i.e., it has sharp edges or points].
"And the operation on it is that you should consider if the prominence of the umbilicus [navel] is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger in this, as has been taught to you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
"And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to have his hands on his hips, and be standing extended; and then feel with a tent around the entire umbilicus, and then command him to stay between your hands on his hips, and then encircle with spatula lat around the umbilicus over the place that you felt with the tent; and then extend most of the abscess to the sides above with a large hook; and then bind around it with strong thread or silk in a decent manner.
And then carefully slice the middle of the extended abscess on the skin and insert your finger into that opening; if you have found and secured it with the skin, then extract the intestine and push it back inside the belly.
And if you have found the intestine, then take it with a hook; and cut away its excess parts.
But if it is contrary to your bowels or veins, then go around that area, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert into each of them a strong thread, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, causing them to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the extended flesh may dry up and fall off by itself; or cut it when it has dried up and healed, and then cure it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is swollen with flesh or moisture, then it is necessary that you proceed to open the abscess as we have said and extract the pus or moisture found within it, and then cure it with water that heals and strengthens the place.
Capítulo 33 (or Chapter 33)
Sobre el tratamiento del cáncer.
Ya hemos dicho, en la división, sobre los diferentes tipos de cáncer y cómo se puede tratar con medicinas, y que es preferible el tratamiento con hierro para que no cause úlceras; y hemos hablado del cáncer en su causa y precaución.
Y los antiguos decían que en algunas ocasiones el cáncer puede ser eliminado de un lugar donde es posible la extracción, como en el caso del cáncer que se encuentra en las mamas o la pelvis y sus miembros adyacentes, para extirpar todo lo que esté afectado, y especialmente cuando comienza pequeño.
Sin embargo, cuando está avanzado y es grave, no conviene abordarlo, porque no he podido curar a nadie de esto ni he visto a otro hacerlo, ni que haya llegado a un resultado favorable.
Y la operación en él, cuando se encuentra como hemos dicho, es que tú actúes primero y dejes al paciente y purgues con hiel negro algunas veces, y luego sángralo si hay una evidente plenitud atrófica.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he will be placed for the operation, and then provide him with those tools that are necessary; and then ensure that all parts are thoroughly cleansed with good soap until there is no remaining cause of his illness. Let the blood flow and do not stop it hastily; express the areas and cleanse all the clotted blood thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument suitable for the task among the available instruments.
But if there is excessive bleeding from the vein or an artery, then cauterize it until the blood flow ceases, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter .4
On the treatment of dropsy patients.
We have already mentioned, in the division, the species of dropsy caused by water and the signs of each species, as well as their treatment with medications.
And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of althitis alone, and it should not be treated with iron in the case of tympanites or hypothermia, for this is fatal.
And when you have treated this species of tympanites dropsy with medicines and your medicine does not work, consider that if the patient has already become weakened by it or by another illness such as a cough or abdominal pain, do not treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
Sure, here is the translation for the given sentence:
Based on the given context and the similarity to medieval medical treatises in Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And then consider if the origin of the dropsy is from the intestines, for it is necessary that you perform a section [incision] away from the navel by three digits towards the lower parts, on his right side over the pubic bone.
But if the origin of the dropsy is from a liver ailment, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side.
And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where you want to treat the patient, so that the superfluous humors do not flow to that cold place.
And then perforate the vein with the instrument, and then introduce it into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the vein and the knife, and you extract that; and if [the quantity] is of one nail or around it.
And then pierce the knife until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form: and it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the end of which is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut in the manner of a feather quill, as you see:
And on the uppermost part of his extremity is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, they must immediately remove it from the instrument, so that in the following hour it evacuates as much water as possible. For if you cause it to evacuate more than necessary in one hour, the patient will die very quickly due to the loss of his animal spirit, or he may suffer from cynanche, which is a sign of approaching death.
But evacuate according to the patient's strength, and according to what his pulse and complexion indicate to you about his constitution.
And immediately after removing the instrument, retain the water that has caused the problem by means of a cord that retains the hole on which you have been instructed to pierce in this manner.
And the next day, and on the following days, if the patient can tolerate it, reinsert the instrument, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, taking care to ensure that very little water remains.
However, if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then cure that by burying it in hot sand, and move it in warm baths, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of water, as I have mentioned before in this preceding text.
### Chapter LV
### About the care for infants born with unopened urinary passages.
Sometimes one of the infants is born from its mother's womb with the head of its urinary passage not open (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, one should pierce him with a subtle probe as soon as he is born, in this manner:
And place a thin lead probe into the opening and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate, remove it so that he can urinate; then replace it again.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine going to this place will not leave through this opening. ismeyntre
But that one whose passage is narrow should be treated with a lead probe, as we have said, for several days until it becomes enlarged.
But those in whom the passage is not in its proper place are called such because their cause is that for these infants, the one who is born with his passage facing towards the tip of the penis cannot urinate towards the front inside, until he raises his penis upwards with his hand; and this is not due to congenital defects, because semen cannot reach the mother in the correct manner, and it is a very serious illness.
Based on the provided translation method and the text you've given, here's a line-by-line translation of the source sentence:
And be careful in your operation to control the blood flow, for this often happens; and press on the patient with something that will stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The text you've provided appears to be a fragment from a medieval medical treatise written in what seems to be a Romance language—likely an early form of Spanish or Portuguese, given the similarities to modern Spanish and Portuguese. Let's translate it line by line into English:
Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the source sentence:
Certainly! Let's break down this line by line and attempt a translation:
"And of these, one is malignant and the other is not.
"No-maligna means that you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut it until it becomes completely empty; then place a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
"And if the abscess is malignant and has a dark color, then you should administer a cautery near its opening and its cause.
"However, if the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the inside part first until it is healed; and then you treat the outside part, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be narrowed.
"And if you see blackness and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, then it is necessary that you remove everything that has become blackened and will decay or has already decayed; and then place on it something with honey, which is mixed with finely ground and sifted pomegranate peel and crushed cumin seeds.
And then care for him with another remedy until he is well.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
For the cautery to be effective, it must address two issues simultaneously: stopping the flow of blood and treating the wound when it becomes infected.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you should insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to injury or abscess), it is necessary to separate them with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to separate them exactly, then you should excise some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, being thin, is easily perforated due to its slight thickness.
Here's the line-by-line translation:
And then it should be treated with six strong styptics until it is healed.
Chapter 57
About the cleansing of infants and the care of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for incontinence like other diseases; but since it is our operation and our will, and its effects are mainly on infants, it is necessary that we indicate the best operation and easier way to preserve their health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. And the reason is that we have acquired this practice through experience. Because of this, I have found most craftsmen and barbers practicing circumcision and cleansing with a razor and hot towels; and they use a ligature with thread and incision with a nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors, with a ligature with thread like the one used in cleansing with a nail, because many times the skin slips above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is very likely to lead to another incision and certain pain. And with cleansing, which is done with alphecati and is fingertip-sized like what shoemakers use, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secured because it enters very quickly into its hole.
But in the operation with a nail, quickly observe iron and ruin your operation. And the child's penis is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
But the cleansing that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread is of great benefit, as I have discovered through experimentation. The scissors are of proportionate incision, for this reason: the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand so that the two sharpnesses are in proportion, and you make an incision following a comparison at one time; and it is made with compression of the thread in the shape containing the penis from all sides, with which there is no error whatsoever.  The translation provided uses modern Spanish terms for "scissors" (forfexs), "thread" (fiel), and "penis" (vergua), as these are more familiar to English speakers than their medieval counterparts. Additionally, I've used "sharpness" to translate "acuitat," which is a false friend in this context, as it does not refer to the sharpness of the scissors but rather to the points or tips of the scissors. The sentence structure has also been rearranged for better readability in English.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child remain calm if it is one of those who understands a little, then do not proceed but rather place the hand on its stomach for as long as necessary, and leave it to rest until the next day.
Then proceed to cheer up the child in every way possible so that they can regain their consciousness. And then have the child stay between your hands steadily prepared, and do not be restless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
Then insert your hand into the child's stomach and blow into the opening, and pull it in until the tip of the stomach is emptied, and then clean it of any accumulated filth.
The form of the forceps for modification is as follows:
The fingernails should be non-cutting, and the others should be cutting, so that the edge of the nail is not protruding, and the length of the two cutting edges should be equal to the length of two handles.
But the mistake in modification is that if you remove the entire internal thread or a part of it, you should insert it again.
Therefore, you must stretch that for your time with your nail in front of the affected area and insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the affected area, then you should let it be until the abscess has softened, and gently scrape that away, and insert it as you have prepared.
And beware of the tip of the wire, for it will not be good for him.
And therefore treat it with that which solidifies the wound from the powders that we have listed in the section on powders.
And if he has been injured by an excess of cold, and it is treated according to the instructions above, this will not harm him.
And continue to treat him with what we have said until he is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or congealed blood, or by pus or tumor, and this is similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned, and the cause has been made clear on the patient, then a syringe must be administered to him with an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: Let it be of silver and have a subtle curved shape, just like a quill from a bird's wing with the subtlety of a long ray, in the likeness of a palm and a half, at the end of which there is a subtle reed.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
And make a cross over the patient on the saddle, and insert the bladder and penis with moistened oils, olive oil and rosewater.
And then introduce the pipe with ease until it reaches the end of the penis; then double the penis over its base; and then push the pipe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that is what causes the patient to be emptied in a void state, and this is not done according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes awry.
And then draw out the filthy liquid with wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then draw that out and apply as a remedy the urine, and use the pipe, do not cease doing this and use the pipe until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59
Of the type of enema for the bladder with a cupping glass and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or it is narrowed by burning, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument called a cupping glass, and this is its shape:
"As long as the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed. And in that, there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
At the beginning, there is a concave place, in which what is peeled off is located. According to the quantity that oppresses that [place], without addition, it enters until, when some cause pulls the humors away from that [place], it is pulled out; and when it is expelled, water is also pulled out; and when it is expelled far, just as a clamp-like device with which naptha is applied in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity and pull out with it the water that has been pushed to the upper parts, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
Then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as we have described in the chapter on the foreskin; and then expel the humidity with water, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
"And let it be made of silver or lead, the tip of which should resemble a small feather, and then insert it inside gently.
"Then take a pig's bladder and put in it the moisture you want to crystallize, then tie it between two strong bands with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
"Then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the liquid.
"Then press your hand on the bladder with the liquid until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
"But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes so that they are sewn shut; then add the circle so that it is well secured, since you place in it the water or other liquids that you want.
"Then tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
It seems like the text is missing or incomplete. "Capitol .lx." likely indicates the start of a chapter, with ".lx." being the Roman numeral for 60. Without additional context or sentences, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation. However, if you can provide more of the text, I would be happy to help translate it line by line into English.
"De extracción de piedras." (About the removal of stones.)
"We have already mentioned in the division the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
"And we have mentioned the stone in which the operation is performed with the hand and sectioning.
"And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is placed in the bladder.
"And I will relate this with a clear explanation and summary.
"So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly appears in children; and among its signs is that the urine exiting from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient frequently touches his penis, and often he goes to urinate, and soon he becomes restless; and with this he has forcibly defecated.
"And the cure of children from that is easier before they reach fourteen years old, and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. In young people, it is more common because they are among those [who experience this].
And concerning that one whose stone is larger and the cure is more pleasant; if it is small, it is contrary to that [one].
Therefore, when we come to the cure of this condition, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; because sometimes this gap prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
Then take the patient by their feet and hold them up in such a way that the stone will descend to the bottom of the bladder, or will move from its place sometimes.
Then make that incision between your prepared hands, and let the patient's hands be free from their clothing, so that the entire bladder will be made to lean towards the lower parts.
Then look for it [the stone] and remove everything.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly incise on it with a secant.  />
And if you do not feel it entirely with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the index finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or the middle finger if they are a mature youth, and insert it into their anus. "And seek out the stone until it is beneath your tongue. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And press on it with your finger, and expel it to the external parts at the place where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the knees with their right hand, and with their other hand pull back the skin that is under the knees, in the area where the incision is made.
And then insert a speculum, the shape of which is as follows: And cut into it the space that is between the anus and the knees, not in the middle, but rather towards the left side of the thigh; and let the incision be over that stone, and your finger should be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the external incision is wide and the internal one is narrow according to how much of the stone can be extracted, and no more, because if you press too hard with the finger that is in the anus, the stone will be forced out without difficulty.
And know that there are some stones with angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult.
And about those [stones] it is like a bean, round in shape, and its expulsion is easy to do.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, place it in the slit.
And if it is not like that [round], then you should cleverly contrive over it or apply a gentle pressure to it, the end of which should be like a file with which you press against the stone, and do not let it slip away; or insert a thin instrument with a curved tip underneath it.
But if you cannot [remove the stone] in this manner, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flowing out, cut it off strongly with powdered vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you should push your hand into the bladder's opening, and then cut it out; and then push a little more; and similarly do this if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorant to cut it out with a large section, because this causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urine dripping, because the place [where the stone was] is not completely healed.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that cloth infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be gently drawn out.
And then lay the patient on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with fine ointment and with diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs a mild abscess that is adhesive and corrosive, and it resembles frozen blood as if the blood were congealed in the bladder and for this reason urination is blocked (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to rot and cause putrefaction in the patient.
And then wash the wound with strong vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all manner of putrefaction, according to what is suitable for him in the cure until he is healed.
And it is necessary during all the treatment that you lift both cushions and adjust the medications that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it is inserted into it, and voiding urine is prohibited, then cure that with water as I recommended earlier to prevent dryness, for excessive treatment by this method has been accused of causing dryness; and I have tested this, and it is that you take a needle made of fine iron, the shape of which is as follows:
with a pointed triangular end, sharp, inserted into a handle.
Then take flax thread, and tie the bladder with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron needle into the bladder, piercing gently until the needle reaches the stone. And turn the needle with your hand in the stone little by little, and you will pierce it through until you make it come out on the other side; for the urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand on the opening where the stone has exited from the bladder, for it is sharp and will be expelled with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
If this cure is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then take a rope and place one end under the stone, and the other end over the stone. Then quickly descend onto the stone on that crossbar between two ropes. And then extract it. Then unbind the ligature and remove the clotted blood from the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the rope under the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder. The other ligature on top is only so that when the rope is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the rope on top, that you lift the chain above the parts or return to your starting point, and cover the wound in this way as we have said.
Chapter 61
On the Extraction of a Stone from Women
A stone in women is rarely formed.
However, if a stone appears in one of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many ways.
One of the causes is that the woman is very virgin.
And the second cause is that you do not find a good woman who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or one of the women having husbands.
The third cause is that you do not find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth cause is that the location of the section on a stone in women is far from the stone's location, so you need a previous section, and this is fearsome.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a skilled midwife, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of her, then look for a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a well-trained midwife in women's matters, or a woman who is knowledgeable in this art.
Therefore, present her and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that she should first check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone. ️
"Therefore, if one finds it, cut it off under its own tongue, and then command the patient to spit onto it.
"But if it is not visible, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and move it around until she finds the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying firm pressure.
"Therefore, once it is found, it should be gradually removed from the bladder's orifice through the urethra until it reaches the pelvis.
"Then insert the end of a catheter into the bladder, and move it around until you feel the stone, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting underneath it.
"And the initial incision should be small; then insert the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to the size of the stone so that it can pass through.
"And you should know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, round and pointed, long and short, and some have edges.
The translation of the given text into English is as follows:
And if you see blood flowing, place crushed vitriol on the area and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure you have prepared the instruments used for stone removal in men, so that you are assisted by them during your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery, then place powder on the area and press it firmly with a cloth and a bandage, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will soon die. Then heal the wound.
Therefore, when the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
On the incision for hernia.
A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac that is left behind by the testicle cord containing the ovum, and it is called a sac.
And sometimes it is in the proper tissue that nature has prepared for the ovum until another ovum is made, and this is the cord of the testicle between the white sac we mentioned earlier, and this is not water but liquid.
And the cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the genitals, because to those it is infiltrated with this matter, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the genitals.
And this humidity has various colors, for its color is either fading to yellow or red, or reddish, or black and feculent, or watery white, and it is the latter that is most common.
And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is present are these: because if it is in the white cyphac that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains that part on all sides.
And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round like half an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the genitals and the white cyphac, then it is like a bag hanging down.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you prove the color of the humidity in the swelling with a small piece of white cloth; and according to what appears on the trace of the cloth, judge what is inside it.
When we come to the care of him with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bloodletted if this is possible for you, and often let his body bleed.
Then let him be laid on his back over some cause a bit higher, and place beneath him soft cloths.
Then sit yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand at his right side, who should extend their hand to one of two sides at the fold between the thighs and the division of the navel of the belly.
Then take a lancea spatula and cut through the fold between the thighs from the middle to the length until near the anus.
And let the incision be made equally distant from the straight line that you should follow along the pubic bone until it reaches the white fat layer.
And scrape it off, and observe, and be careful not to cut too deep; and your incision with which you scrape should be divided downwards until it is suspended by the most subtle and finest investigation possible according to what is possible for you.
Then pierce the fat layer full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the thread to the divided parts above; do not touch the testicles, comprehending the genitals, and cut the thread in that manner which is possible for you. And cut that part completely or in pieces, and especially its thin edge, for if you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
But if the swelling proceeds from outside its testicle during your operation, then after you have completed the cutting of the thread, return it inside, and then join the two lips of the genital sac with stitching, and then treat that area as the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the swelling corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to cut the vessels that are over the ligaments, and extract the testicle, and then treat it with the water we mentioned.
But if the water is gathered in two similar parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut that part just as you have done with the other one; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then do it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert between the sections wool soaked in oil or rosemary oil; and place another wool soaked in vinegar and oil outside, and spread it over two knees and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pills, and tie them securely with a bandage that is according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and moistened with carmenated wool according to this manner; the ends of which are used to press the area with cotton or wet wool, are added securely in the groin area of the pants. One end takes from the buttocks into the back, and the second takes from the crotch, and two ends below on two cushions, and two other ends above on two pillows, and all pressure is adjusted in the groin area of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a scalpel; and it is that you take a fine surgical knife and cut with it the cord of the testicles, and it is ignited as we have prescribed until the white bladder containing the water is revealed. Then you take the cautery in this manner: And it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture with that needle, and let it burn until all the moisture has been expelled.
Then extend the needle with pincers, and scrape with pincers, and burn subtly with a pointed cautery; and cut that which is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and beware of the egg so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if any swelling or abscess forms during the time of cutting or cautery, or if there is bleeding, then you should treat whatever problem arises in this manner, with the care that is appropriate for it as has been said.
But if the patient is very sick and does not expect to survive a second operation because of its severity, then perform perforation as I recommend here; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is watery.
Then you should have the patient lie on a raised seat, then puncture the abscess in its lowest part with a lance, and let the puncture be as long as the body.
And it should be an opening wide enough for all the water to flow through.
Then place a cotton cloth over the area and tie it securely in order for the remaining water to flow out. And then treat it so that the wound may heal.
But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should pierce it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound creates resistance and prevents the exit of water, therefore you must insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy patients, the shape of which has been described above; or adjust a small opening in the opposition of the wound.
And know that the water will return, and it will accumulate again after about six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced in the same manner, because the patient will thus endure his days.
Chapter 63.
On the incision for a flesh-based hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great fear of loss through mishap in the major dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by this method as the best.
And I am remembering the operation in that case and the characteristics of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies of those whose humors are corrupt and this happens for many reasons: either because of acute bitter excess which is infused into the humors, or because of a blow.
And the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the body, and if pain is not found in it, it is a serious abscess.
And if the abscess is hard and light, it is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflammation of these so that its memory is already perceived, or by the inflation of veins.
But that which is caused by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflation of a vein does not disperse at all from it for any reason, due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that incision can be made on this type and on other fleshes; and it is that you cut the vein of the humors, and then extend the egg to the separated parts above, and extract what is white from it, and deliver the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspenders after you have delivered all the parts of the egg.
Therefore, if the egg is already cooked with these foods, then it is necessary for you to remove the egg and insert it again.
And if there is an adhesion between the bladder and the intestines, or between other parts of the body, then it is necessary for you to remove all that adhesion and insert a round probe.
However, if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which lies behind it, then you should insert everything that belongs to it and remove the egg as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and afterwards, care for it with another treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64
Of the treatment of a hernia that is caused by wind.
Wind is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with swelling of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, one must be mindful of its cause, as has been previously mentioned.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to say that the operation should be performed according to what was done by the ancients.
Certainly! Let's translate the provided medieval medical text into English:
"Then cut transversely with a sharp blade through the right side of the vessels until they are exposed.
"Then scrape away all parts as we said earlier in the removal of arrows that are lodged in the temples.
"Then insert a needle with a double thread into those locations where the wound occurred, and tie it at the beginning of the wounded area, and then again at the end. "Then cut those areas straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
"Then treat the wound with the treatment used for other wounds in which you want health to be restored, so that the vessels may close and heal without causing harm.
"But if the wound affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to tie off the testicles along with the vessels, so that he is deprived of all nourishment due to the severing of the vessels and they are cut off, or tied off so that they do not swell with them.
It seems that you want to continue with translating medieval medical texts. I'll be glad to help you with this task. However, it is essential to note that without more context, it might be challenging to provide a precise translation for each line due to the archaic language and potential variations in terminology.
About the treatment of internal hernias.
The onset of this hernia is due to a cut that occurs in the small intestine extended over the belly, because some of the intestines exit through that rupture into the abdominal cavity.
And this rupture can be either of the small intestine or of its skin, and these two types occur for many reasons: from a blow, from a fall, from a shout, from lifting something heavy, or from resemblance.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the small intestine, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and not suddenly, because the small intestine presses on the abdomen.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a cut in the small intestine, because at first it causes sudden and intense pain; and there is an apparent swelling below the navel, which is due to the escape of the intestines, and the body of the hernia appears outside the small intestine. 🔥
And sometimes the intestines come out with the skin, and this internal hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
And sometimes it is done with ventosity, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal rupture, and here it is retained, and this is very harmful to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of this disease with iron, there is fear that the wound may become infected.
And the method of operation for this is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand to its inner parts if it returns; then place the patient on their side between your hands and raise their legs.
Then place the thread which is the thread of the testicles on top, and cut the thread of the testicles completely along its length; then insert into the two lips of the section scissors according to what you need to open the section with them.
And if the section is such that, as far as it is possible for you, the egg may be expelled from it.
Then remove that tissue which remains after the thread of the testicles, until the hard white thread is revealed on each side.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of your sentence:
And you should ask yourself if there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in a white, hard cloth. But if you find any cause from him, then you should remove it to his stomach afterward.
And then incise in the area below the cord of the testicles, through which blood and pus will flow as we have described in what has been said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage we have described (and sometimes a white cloth is cauterized, which we mentioned after the incision to prevent bleeding, because often this happens). And let the bandage stay until it falls off by itself.
But if the discharge is delayed, then soak a cloth in hot water and place it on the affected area until it falls off, as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66
About Hernias
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been bold enough to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done in this way, as we have described for the hernia with blood vessels; which is that you lift the vessels near the cut on that side; and then dry in the middle of the spot around the abscess with water that opens it up, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the displacement that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and the area swells up.
And do not give any cause to the intestines of the genitals; and if you do, that is little; and it returns in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged with this, there is a deep fissure in the abdomen until the intestines come out of the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdomen which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes are that the abdomen is extended, and then it becomes softened and the area is swollen and raised.
And its treatment is with a pointed instrument as previously described in this account.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the area of the swollen rupture with a section according to the length of three times.
And then strengthen the white bandage that is under the knee until it is uncovered.
And then take the hand and place it on the prominent part of the bandage, and press it against the belly button.
And then cut the two prominent ends on the end of the bandage and join one to the other with a stitch.
And then remove the end of the bandage, and do not leave any part of it on the body, nor extend the hole, nor cause anything similar as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat it as you would with wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the bandage is tightened and the prominence of the tear is not adjusted.
Cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Chapter .68.
Of softening the knot of the testicles.
Often times the knot of the testicles in some men is softened by this, because the flesh between them is softened and it is believed that he will be cured.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.
And if you want, in the beginning soften the superfluous part with three or four cookings and secure it firmly with a stitch.
And then incise between the stitches, and then treat for treatment of other diseases until he is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69
Of Castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for some reasons it is permitted to me to write about it in this book; and there is no need to mention it except for two reasons: one is so that the doctor knows about it when he is questioned about it, so that he may know how to treat the person to whom it happens; and the other reason is that we sometimes have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as with mules, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by ligation or by incision and excision.
But in the case that is done by ligation, the way to do it is to make the animal stand in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hanging down. And then take those with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear under the touch.
In a case of castration done by incision and section, you should hold the animal and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
And then tie the ligaments, and cut on each testicle with a section until you process two testicles.
And then cut those pus that you will have skinned off. Do not leave on the testicles any cause, but place a subtle ligation that is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better when done by tightening, because tightening strongly avoids any cause from the testicles so that the animal desires coitus.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears as if there is space between the spermatic cord and the testicles, in which there is a figure like a woman's vulva with pubic hair.
And at times from that pain there is urine which is in the cords of the testicles.
But in women it is different: and that is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller at the outer edge, similar to the foreskin of a man, and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you bind those swollen parts until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the remedy for other diseases.
And in the second kind of men, in which there is urine in the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor treatment for him.
Chapter 21.
Of swelling and prominent flesh caused by women's conditions.
Mild swelling is treated with natural remedies until it subsides, and care should be taken; and sometimes it becomes more pronounced in some women to the point that it spreads like in men and persists during intercourse.
Therefore, you must hold the excess swelling with your hand or grease and bind it.
And do not hesitate at the beginning, especially in the region of the anus, so that there will be no flow of blood.
And then cure it with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
But flesh that is born is flesh that comes out from the mother's horror until it fills that, and it exits easily to the outer parts according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it “tailed illness”); therefore, we should cut it like lint and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
On the treatment of anal fissures.
Anal fissure is when the woman's anus is not pierced, or it is a small opening. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has occurred beforehand, and this can be caused by unsuitable flesh or subtle or thick excrement.
And it occurs either in the mother's anus, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or on its lower part, and it is forbidden to have sex, to become pregnant, and to give birth, and it is especially forbidden during menstruation.
And the recognition of that is done by examining the uterus, if there is prolapse, then it is certain; but if not, then you should search for it with your fingers or with a speculum.
But if the prolapse is subtle and close to the two lips, then you cut it and tear it away.
And you place powder on both lips, and then you place your index fingers of both hands together on top.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread, and then you stretch both lips with force until that subtle prolapse is torn and the prolapse is revealed.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the area, and have someone walk on it during the day to ensure that the cut does not heal.
But if the prolapse is large and thick, then you should cut it with a lanceolate spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the prolapse is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
And have with you the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as agnus castus, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not easily closed.
And hold it for several days, and then administer some of his blood to drink.
And then she should be cured with the other treatment for healing until she is healed.
And sometimes it happens during childbirth with the passage of other flesh, and then you should proceed according to this manner. But if it is due to hardened pus in the mother, do not oppose the pus in any manner.
Chapter 73.
Of the care of hemorrhoids and tail, and red bubo that occurs in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are caused by the openings of many veins, from which blood flows continuously; and old hemorrhoids turn into warts.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say thus: those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to touch, then no treatment should be made for them. ️
"However, those that are in the mother's womb and upon which the child feels, those are the ones that are cured.
"And have the woman sit in cold water and then carefully cut away those [problems] with scissors or with rough cloth, and incise them with razors.
"And then sprinkle on them the powder from one of the blood-staunching powders without grinding, such as alum and similar ones.
"And then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
"And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds, and similar things.
"And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of [the patient].
"And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses, and two leeches to the nipples without scarification.
"And then take wool and soak it in coriander juice or in parsley juice or in rosemary juice with vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
"And heal that within so that it may be healed.
"Chapter 74
"Concerning the perforation of the esophagus, which occurs in the mother.
"Many types of tumors occur in the mother, such as cancer and lapind-tumors, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, varicose veins, and other tumors. "And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of those and their signs and their treatments in the division.
"And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the cautery which comes from the mother when it is one of the tumors that grow together, and if you want to know in what manner its operation is performed with iron.
"Then it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the tumor at its beginning is sharp with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and if on occasion it reddens and if this sensation strikes it, then do not attempt to perforate it; instead heal it with that which helps in the maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
And at this point, you should have the woman lie down on a bed that has two beds; and lean back on her heels, align her feet with the part below her belly, expand her thighs, place her arms underneath her knees, and bind each with a bandage suitable for the occasion.
And then the midwife should follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which she has opened the mother's orifice, the shape of which will be described in the following cases.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you insert it together with the child of the mother into the woman, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be more than the child of the mother and the midwife. But if the instrument is larger than the child of the mother, then it is necessary to place cloths on the surface of the child of the mother so that the entry of any instrument into the child of the mother is prohibited.
And it is necessary that you place the tip of the instrument on the left side above and that the midwife holding the instrument turns the tip until she has opened the mother's orifice.
And when the swelling appears and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that part of his head with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent on the wound; and put pressure on it with a larger bandage.
And place outside the bandage, over the wound, clean wool soaked in water where there are boiled mallows.
And let it be treated for about two days with an ointment which you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the bandage and the wound are washed so that it is anointed with water and honey, and then with water in which there is cooked lily root or long-leafed orris, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is hidden within the swollen bandage, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating him with iron, but rather care for him with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter 75
To teach midwives how to treat pregnant women when the fetus is in an abnormal position, according to the figure of nature.
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
When you see these signs, it is necessary to press the belly so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend onto their head, give them the second birth and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
However, that which occurs in this way is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the embryo comes out with its feet first and the body protrudes before the head and the feet, or one hand is by the foot, or the head comes out with one hand next to it, or on the belly, and it quickly turns onto its neck, and it resembles unflattering figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against mistakes and deception.
And I am showing you all the figures of these, and what sign is in them, so that it may be signified by this and has been established thus.
When the child comes out with its head first in a natural way, and that is very difficult for the woman, and her strength is already weakened, then do this: or let the women have it, and vaporize his womb with cooked fenugreek and moistened oils.
And then insert the instrument between its small spatula and use it to make a cut with the second part of the tool, or slice it open with your nail until the moisture within it is released. And press the woman's abdomen until she delivers the baby.
But if it does not deliver, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a mixture of flaxseed and fenugreek oil, combined with vinegar.
And then command her, and have her anointed, that she be squeezed and made to sneeze with conditions; and cover her mouth and nose for one hour, because the baby will soon come out.
And if both hands of the child have already been delivered at first, then it is necessary that you push them back gently little by little. But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on her knees and raise her feet behind her, and then rock the knees back and forth on the ground; and make sure the woman is held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the hands are not turned back and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the remaining parts of the child or tie its body to its hand with cloth and pull it out evenly, because that will soon come out.
When the baby emerges from its feet, you should then pull it towards yourself, and then turn the baby around, and then envelop it, and then take one of its feet and gently extend it little by little.
But as it emerges into the birth canal, you should then command it to push, and make it cough with gentle persuasion, because it will soon be born if God wills it.
And if it is not born with the above-mentioned method, then you should return the baby little by little until you place it according to its natural position, because it will then be born with easy delivery.
And if it is hindered by all that we have mentioned, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then apply it with water to the woman's vulva, the lowest part of her belly. And then make her sit in lukewarm water until she reaches the hips.
And when you see that the separated parts are softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for him and apply it to him. And when you perform sublimation for an hour, then make the person sit on a chair, and then cause them to sneeze and expel mucus from their mouth, and collect it, and press gently on the lower part of their abdomen with light compression, because this will quickly expel the phlegm.
Based on the pattern you've provided, here's a translation attempt for the new sentence: Certainly! Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And if he cannot walk, then lay him down on his bed, and shake his limbs with great force, and immediately administer leeches which I have recommended for mucilage.
And if labor has begun, then lay her down on the bed, and observe the contractions of her belly, guide the baby according to its natural position, make the woman sneeze, and tell her to push until delivery is complete.
Immediately after birth, spread out the baby's arms and place him on his back atop his mother. The midwife should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it until it comes out easily.
And when he is born and has been guided, then place on his chest that which we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
Then command her to nurse the baby little by little, and when she has done this, lay her down on a bed and command her to lean over her right side, then command her to push; and make her sneeze with intensity.  (The text seems to be describing efforts to deliver the placenta.) The expulsion of the fetus is prepared on the side.
When they are suffering from a horrible pain according to this method, consider it, and then you should cut the second skin with your nail until it is drained of its moisture.
And if the feet are swollen on his face and neck, then you should cut that part of the navel, so that it is not retained and he may recover.
Then you should remove the skin to the inner parts until you place that which is necessary, and order the woman to press on herself several times, and the humors will be expelled with ease, God willing.
Premature birth of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are born after many watchings, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is strange and rare; there are two causes for this: nature, and not life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, with one second skin, and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing these between the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they come out like this as if it were a fetus by easy natural exit, and sometimes they come out by an impossible exit as we have said.
And if some are difficult during childbirth and they reach the stage we mentioned about unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, and with care, and acts according to every figure as she has been prepared by her intellect to bring about health.
The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, even ten are formed, and it has already been verified that a woman has aborted or given birth to six, and another ten, all formed, which was done by the measure of the glorious wise men.
And all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife, for she knows well that appearance, and therefore she should act accordingly.
Chapter 76
Of the removal of the child when it is dead.
When you care for the dead child as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet issued forth, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents by which her loss is feared.
Based on the pattern and similarities with known Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
And let the attendant hold that [part] of two parts or bind it in linen cloth so that his body does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
And then you moisturize the mother's mouth with oils, honey, and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mixtures. Then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then seek with her hand the place where the fingernails rest on the fetus.
And in this case: then consider if the fetus is ready to come out headfirst. Then place your fingernails in its heel, neck, mouth, palate, below the chin, or in the nearby ribs, or beneath the hypochondrium.
But if the descent is breech-first, then in the heel or the midpoint of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the nail with your right hand and place its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand until you reach the navel.
And then place and keep in the position of the patient another cushion, or a third if necessary, to ensure that it is not too tight, but rather extended according to their right size only.
And let it be raised on all sides, so that the removal of it may be eased in the same way as is done with a tooth when it is extracted.
It is necessary that there be something between them to soften the extension; and if any part of it is held back, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and turn with those things which are held back.
Therefore, if the part of the baby is forgotten, then the fingers should be changed to a place that is more advanced; and do this until all of the baby is born.
However, if the hand is pushed forward before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the narrowness of the birth canal, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then pull that hand out until all of it has been born, and cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
And you must do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
Based on the pattern you've provided, here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if the head is swollen and constrained, you should cut the throat so that the moisture in the feet is drained out.
But if it is not complicated and does not obey swelling, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if there are abscesses or dropsy in the stomach, then you should pierce it so that the moisture within can flow out.
But if the stomach is on its feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mother's mouth will also be light.
But if the stomach and feet are constricted, then you should extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the stomach and feet so that the liquid within can flow out.
But if the other members are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, she should insert her hand into the air pocket, search for the head with it, and draw it towards the mother's mouth using the aforementioned words. Then she should insert one or two fingers into it and draw it out using those.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence: And administer plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the abscess is on the side, if possible it should be lanced; and administer the water that we mentioned for the live abscess.
And if this is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and removed.
And you must ensure that no cause remains inside the second one.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the water that we have mentioned for the treatment of abscesses that occur from the mother one.
And if there is a flow of blood, then dissolve in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and on top of that another living one implanted, and then the other fetus also died. It happened to him that he had a long-standing abscess in his navel; and it swelled inside until it burst open, and began to push out arms.
And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
When you notice any swelling on the patient's abdomen due to certain causes, apply a strong adhesive plaster. And then I extracted a bone from him, and after some days passed, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly astonished, for there are no bones in the belly.
And so I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Therefore, I investigated the wound and extracted many bones from her, the woman being in her thousandth month of pregnancy, and she lived in this manner for a long time; a small piece of arm came out of her.
And I did not consider this strange, because there is science and help in this, which the physician can achieve with his hand for treatment.
About the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the fetus.
The shape of the vertex with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of a dilator with which the lips are cut, at whose cutting there are two vertices in the two ends of two foetuses. However, this vertex should be more subtle and narrower, and it should be made either of ivory or boxwood.
And let the width of each pole be two fingers and the margin of each also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of two poles there are two fastenings of this same pole which are already secured, whose length is slightly more than half a palm, and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additional items should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed fingers.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it are two additional items as you see, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging over, and open what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the quantity you want of the approximation of the mother's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of a whirlwind, which the ancients called:
The form of a driving wind with which the child is delivered.
The form of friendship, in which the head is enlarged.  This translation seems to be based on the assumption that "amisidat" is a typo for "ampliatat," meaning "enlargement." If "amisidat" is intended to mean something else, please provide more context so I can give a more accurate translation.
Based on the context provided and the similarities to medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence: Here is my best attempt at translating the given line into English based on the context provided:
Here's a translation of the first line:
"There are two methods of using unguents:
"A method using a spatula with two ends, used to cut the head (off).
"Another method using two wide spatulas.
"All these instruments having been exercised, and when more varieties of them are prepared by the craftsmen, the operation becomes easier and more men are needed.
"And do not neglect to have these instruments ready, wherever you may be, because the need for them cannot be avoided.
"About the removal of the placenta.
"When the placenta is retained after delivery, then you should command the woman to hold her breath, and make her sneeze by tickling, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, good.
"And if not, then you take a bowl and make a hole in the cover, and place on it burning herbs like calamint, rue, dittany, chamomile, safflower, cinnamon bark, and centaury. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
Then place a tube of reed in the mouth of the patient and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient's mouth.
Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and the second night will be gone quickly.
But if this treatment persists and does not leave, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the second night with it. When you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the child, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second night, extract it little by little, straightening it so that the woman does not suffer from a strong contraction. It is important for the right and left ribs to be loosened easily.
And if the mother's mouth is tightly closed, we have already recommended the treatment with suffocation and with medication of the olive oil with herbs.
But if it is not treated with all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to do anything on that in repetition of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of him goes into the mother's mouth, and then you should immediately treat that with ointment and tetrapharmakon; for that will cause it to rot quickly within a few days, and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
But when it rots, an evil smell rises to the head and stomach, which harms the patient; then it is necessary that appropriate fumigations be administered for this purpose.
But some of the Ancients have already tested a fumigation of juniper berries and dry figs for this purpose.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and the second birth.
It should be made of glass or tin.
And the thin end should be placed in the womb and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
"And make sure that one is completely consumed before starting another.
"For the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
"When a baby is born and his anus is not yet perforated, which has already been carefully checked and verified. "Then the midwife should perforate it with her finger, and if not, use a sharp probe, being careful not to touch the sphincter.
"Then place wool soaked in oil and vinegar over it; and then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
"But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter in the orifice for several days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
"And if the obstruction of the anus is due to the consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then that consolidation must be cut open, and then it should be treated with the water we have mentioned for the treatment of lead.
"For the treatment of fistulas that occur under the anus.
"Fistulas that occur in the lower part under the anus are known as growths, which occur near the outside of the anus or in the space between two parts.
And it is a fistula or fissure.
And with that knot being old and running from the watery white humor or subtle pus, some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And these penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through the exit and windiness; sometimes the patient experiences an exit, and it is easily exited from them, worms.
And some of these fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space and enter the bladder, and into the root of the penis; and some of these penetrating ones enter the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the hip.
And this is how a penetrating fistula entering the anus and non-penetrating is known: you place your finger inside the anus, and introduce thin wire of iron or lead into the fistula when it is not obstructed.
But if there is an obstruction in it, then introduce into it thin wire of lead or horse hair until you feel the wire or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no trace of exit, either of worms or windiness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and so proceed to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from it and the prohibition that the place be healed with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the tent [or inflammation] spreads to this place if there is not a fracture in the bone, and there is pain in the surrounding part; and from it always comes pus; and that medicine has no effect in that place, nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure for everything, and the cure for them is the labor and futility of those doctors who are determined [to try].
But in those that are not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already proven.
And have the patient lie between your hands on his back and raise his thighs between them, the hips be inclined to his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead or iron if there is a fracture in the fistula, until you know where the inflammation spreads.
And if that [situation] is felt by the patient around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger that the tent is already penetrating on its own, or if you feel something between your finger and that [tent], then know for certain that it has penetrated; and at that point do not work on it, because there is no cure in it, as we have said.
Nevertheless, some people say that it can be cured later in certain men.
And of the treatment by which healing is hoped for in him, it is that you should prepare a fine, subtle cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as has been mentioned before, and insert that heated iron into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fibrous tissues resembling bird quills are completely adjusted.
And then wrap that [area] with clean cloths until all the adjusted tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote the growth and hardening of the flesh. If it is healed, good; and if not, then it cannot be cured at any time by any other treatment.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then clean those fistulated flesh parts that resemble the quill of a feather, making sure none are left behind for any reason.
But if blood flow occurs between you and the operation when inspecting those parts of the flesh, then use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine. Cauterizing with fire has two good properties: it adheres the flesh together and it dries up the humors by stopping the bleeding.
And then wrap that wound with clean cloths or fine wool until it reaches the arm, and then heal the wound with hardening ointments to promote healing and strengthening of the flesh.
And these medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it has been restored, it is already healed and you need not fear a recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
And therefore, if you find the opening and there is only a thin layer of skin or flesh between it and the rectum, then do not operate on it directly but rather use an indirect method through trust and hope.
The text seems to be discussing different methods for treating a wound in the rectal area: And sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the buttocks around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated tip probe, which is like a needle for preparing the hearts in this way:
And insert it into that thread wrapped in five threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttocks very deeply, then you extract the thread from that hole such that you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and join the two ends together, and tighten each one, and let it stay for a day or two. And when you have drawn the thread more into the flesh, tighten well until those flesh parts between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall off.
Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you have prepared, until it is well within the flesh, for you should not do this yourself to avoid cutting the skin; and then continue with that until it is healed.
The form of the pointed spatula used to split the fistula: the tip is very sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not insert what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
The stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are found in two forms, either appearing within the rectum like coals, or those that protrude as if covered with fat. And these are small and large, and blood flows from them always or sometimes, and they can be many, and they may protrude outside the rectum, and at its ends.
However, those that protrude outside the rectum are of a different nature due to less moisture, from which flows citron-colored water or a little blood with continuous pus, and they are distinguished by their color.
And the treatment for those inside the rectum is to instruct the patient to sit and to express until the rectum protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then cut and suspend with scissors what you have grasped with your fingernail, and then incise those according to their root.
This text appears to be discussing the treatment of ingrown nails. Here's a line-by-line translation: And then care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the feces do not come out easily, then make the patient fast with a clyster that has a small opening, and let it be washed with water from the colon so that it comes out easily when the patient is pressed.
However, if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause of them is easy to treat. You should take hold of them with your fingernail or with tweezers, and cauterize them. Then care for them with the previously mentioned water until they are healed.
And for those whom you have cauterized, it is necessary that you administer sutures to them in this manner: Take some thread and wrap it around the needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the part above. Make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and tie them lengthwise; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.  (This passage seems to describe a technique for tying off hemorrhoids after cauterization.)
And do this for all (affected areas), and leave one of them open, so that the excess blood can drain from there.
Then place a cloth infused with rose oil or cerate over the affected area, and place it on the wound, instructing the patient to rest. And leave that open until it heals; and when it is healed, treat those areas with ointment or another remedy until they are healed.
And when they are old and this medicine does not work, then you should scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist, and remove the scab that forms on top, which prevents healing; and then treat them until they heal.
Then you should remove them with a strong and violent purgative, as soon as they start to bleed and become raw; and then treat them until they are healed.
Know that leprosy, which is called "lepra," appears as red or dark patches on the skin resembling a caper fruit, and it appears all over the body but more commonly in the areas below the feet and hands, and through these you will know its pain.
And then it is necessary to cut what is around the nail, and it should be held with forceps or tweezers, and then it should be removed from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the part following what has been said in the previous chapter.
However, a wart is a small, rough, round projection on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
And its treatment is that you stretch and cut it, or compress it with iron or wool into which vinegar can be inserted. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
However, a mole is a small, hairy or large, rough projection on the surface of the body, often appearing on the forehead, and when cold touches it, it feels like an insect bite, and it occurs around the body.
And its treatment is to take a quill of the goose or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole so that the circle of the quill encompasses the edges of it; and then revolve your hand with the quill until you cut what is around the mole, and place it on the forehead of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
If you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron in the following manner:
Let the opening at the top of the needle be fine and not perforated, wrapped in such a way that the grasp of the said part is facilitated and its rotation is enabled.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what was previously stated in the chapter on burning with a hot iron.
Regarding the shape of the instruments used for surgery.
Sometimes surgery is performed with silver or bronze instruments, which are cast or hammered; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to the needs of the patient, because those used for treating young children should be small, and for patients whose anus is tight or painful, the instruments should also be small.
The shape of a large and few surgical instruments:
The tip of the needle, at the top where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinct point where the bag is tied, as you can see.
And the end that goes into the anus should be blunt (i.e., not open) like a lion's tooth, thin at the base; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
And let there be a bag in which the medications of the animal bladder or sheep wool are placed, and its size should be one palm.
And let it be pierced by three openings as if it were rolled up; and the space between the openings should be the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into those openings strong threads of raw thread, which are from these threads or wrap around them; and attach the bag to them; and when the bag is attached to it, tighten it at the tip of the crosspiece between two distinguishing marks with a strong constriction, and then tie each opening: However, the method of tying is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance level; and ensure that it is not too hot or too cold.
And then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a stool or bench under them; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the rectum gently, and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and forcefully until everything in the crosspiece is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the crosspiece and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that person to excrete, let them do so as much as they can; and if they sleep with it for an entire night, it is more effective in helping.
But if you treat that person for abdominal pains and their excretion is cut off, then you should continue to apply the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let it be cauterized with a very subtle and clean iron, like those used for treating children.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of plagues what is appropriate for this book, and now I will describe the treatment of them using both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to what causes them and the location upon which they fall.
And the causes by which plagues are often made are such as the throwing of a stone, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
"But the diseases that are in the places of the body are like the disease that strikes the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the back, and similarly to those of the members.
"And I am recommending the treatment for some diseases so that you may follow this reasoning and rule for other diseases as well.
"And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, because the memory of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
"Therefore, I say that when a simple disease occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been broken slightly but it is a large wound and you fear an abscess may form on that patient, then cut and make an incision on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from him as much blood as according to his strength, unless there is some reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little.
"And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the affected part; and watch over the patient to prevent repletion and from eating heavy food.
If there is any reason to prevent indulgence, then reduce food intake and avoid meat and wine.
Place a compress on the wound. If an abscess forms, incise it and let the pus out, then apply oil of roses or wine that has been boiled down to a syrup.
But if you are sure that the abscess has been properly incised, then place a compress on the wound. If it is recent and the blood and air have not changed it yet, then apply a small amount of the powder I will tell you about next.
And if the air has already changed it, then place a compress with some ointment on it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or deep and the lips of it are not close together, then bring them together with stitches as I will tell you about the stitching technique next.
But if the wound is exposed to bone and marrow, and there is no retention but only a small membrane, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place with stitches, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that are tough or have hard kernels or similar things until it heals. 》
And if you find putrefaction in the intestine and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that is rotten and discard it, and subsequently cure it.
However, if there is an artery or vein from which blood could flow in these wounds, and it has not been severed by medicine, then you should inquire about the vessel. And if you find that it is not cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what we have said, then you should cauterize until the blood is stopped.
If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; so you should sprinkle this powder over them, for it will heal them before the air changes them.
And the manner of making the powder is this: take one part of sesame oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; all must be finely ground and sifted, and with it the wound should be filled, and it should be bound tightly until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
And then bind it above with bandages and leave it like that, and do not unbind it while it is in this state, lest the medicine be drained from it before it is healed.
And sometimes this alone cures, when you do not have present any herbs or dragon's blood.
And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place something over them and tighten it, and these are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder. Instead, cure those wounds with the water we have mentioned, so that you place digestive ointments on them, or place flour of barley mixed with water and honey on them until they form a scab; and then cure them with the other remedy until they are healed.
But if there is a bone fracture in the wound, and it is small, then extract it with tweezers.
And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures as follows:
Of neck wounds.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Here's my line-by-line translation of the given text: "And do not apply any cause of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the coldest of all members.
"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or non-rose oil, and rinsed when washed with warm water and the other stones diminishing in this manner, and moist ointments.
"But if the wound is large, then administer stitching, or trim its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
"But if the wound has depth or occurs in it with lower gangrene, then pierce that place where it is most depressed.
"But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
"But if the jugular vein or any of its tributaries has been cut and the neck's veins are saved, then bring together the lips of the wound with a suture over the pipe of the jugular and do not touch it; rather smooth it out and restore it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a proper bandage, and leave it for some days; and afterwards treat it with ointments that contain astringents and stimulants until it is healed.
Based on the provided pattern and the sentence you've given, here's my attempt at translation:
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it, as recommended for you. But if in the wound a fistula has formed, then cure it with water of which the memory will come to you soon in its chapter.
If it is a strike by lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider more if there is air coming from the wound when the patient exhales; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then in the first hour you put powder on it, and do not stretch it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and does not return to the heart and makes the patient worse; but put on it attractive ointment, and dissolve that two times a day.  >
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you put in the opening of the wound cotton wool so that it sucks up the moisture from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the water which is retained in it runs out.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if the wound is caused by a cut from a knife or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that has been previously used for stitching, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if the wound has already affected the bone and some of the cut pieces have fallen inside, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, which will make their removal easier.
And for other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or intermediate.
A small rupture is difficult by another means, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not immediately undertake the intrusion of them to their place, because it swells and becomes thickened so that the entry into it becomes difficult.
And therefore, the best solution is surgery because in this procedure, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned methods.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but there are two common sutures that are also suitable for other body wounds.
And the other two sutures are common to other wounds, but they are particularly suitable for belly suturing.
And I will explain each one to you with an explanation and description.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause for the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
And therefore when this is the case, it is necessary that you scratch it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or you should cook in hot water, hyssop, cumin, and cloves with that, so that the intestine enters until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this is done with a herb that has astringent properties, and it is better than water alone in reducing the swelling.
And so when you see the swelling being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there is althea and mallow, because by this it is relieved of its suffering with little effort.
But if the intestine of the patient has been removed, then apply this treatment: cut the rupture slightly with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not done as a section, so that there will be no need to dry or deplete.
Concerning the instrument, see its form:
One part of it should be sharp and curved, the other part not sharp, with a fine tip that is not as thin as a spatula, but rather blunt at the end.
And so when the wound is widened and the intestine comes out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on water, because it is better.
But when the rupture is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the head and feet of the patient higher than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your attention and consideration on this matter so that the part where the injury is located is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer (treatment) in both large and small wounds.
And in small wounds, place what is prepared for this purpose, and then make sure that the one who will administer the treatment is between your feet, holding the entire disruption with his hand and aligning its edges, and then discover if there is any reason to use another suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; then pass the end of the disruption through the little finger, and tighten the thread with one, making sure not to tie knots at both ends of the thread. Hold the ends of the thread between your fingers so that they penetrate that part; and after adding two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, you will have made four stitches.
And then strengthen with a double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes even from two parts together, and then attach the two lips of the wound in a decent way; and then pass the thickness of the finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the tightening of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate size between coarseness and delicacy, for delicate needles cut the flesh very easily; and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the vein, and therefore they should be of moderate size in both delicacy and coarseness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the vein too closely, so that the flesh is not cut easily and the wound does not open before its healing.
And do not prolong the stitches so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; and place over the stitches bandages spread out on all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave those in place until you know that the wound has already healed.
And these kinds of stitches with needles in any manner are more suitable for small wounds, because even in their stitching one or two needles or around that.
But the second kind of stitch is common: and it is that you should administer the four extremities - two of the thread and two of the needle - in one go, with a needle on which the thread is wrapped thinly and evenly.
And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same side from which it began, so that the thread can be drawn from a higher part of the wound, so that the stitch is like sewing cloth, with which the cloths are tightened.
And place between each stitch the width of the little finger.
And this stitch is known to men.
And with such stitch I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and the opening of the wound was more than a palm, and about two palms of intestines were around the middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned what was protruding from the wound after twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was cured and made well; and then he lived for many years after, and returned to his normal activities.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it happened, because I did not cure him with an ointment, since it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine could be found, but I placed on the wound cotton soaked twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I will describe two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the bowel, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
And thus when the needle penetrates the bowel and in that same stitch straightens and runs the length of the entire body, and leaves the end of the thread where you inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from inside to outside on the other end of the suture.
And thus when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration again in the same end of the suture from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate on the other end from inside to outside.
And use that (tool/instrument) with which you make the penetration into the body at the extreme end of the mirror, so that everything inside it is fully penetrated.
Then begin from this side of the body and insert (the needle) with the end that is on one side, and draw out the needle from the thread which penetrates, and then return it to that thread and bring the end of the needle which is on the other side towards this extremity of the mirror; and draw out that (needle) from the thread which is on the patient's side.
And do this once and again, and do it once more until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of silk with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew the body once from the end of the thread, and leave that other (end) until it is completed.
But the second type of suture, which is also called "Gualia", and which is proper to him and recommended by him, is that you sew it in such a way that some doctors sew it, so that they bring all the divided parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and apply one end of (the thread) and the end of the mirror to the other end of (the thread), and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
And then rotate each of these, and make each one penetrate from the inner side to the outer side in two opposite directions of the limb, except for those that are on the contrary side.
And this manner of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that was previously mentioned.
This is the discourse of Galen
And others may tell you that suture of the abdomen is performed with two needles; therefore, you should insert a thread into each of these needles, and begin by introducing the needle from the side where you are, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the stitching of those who sew the intestines equally.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
But the treatment of this wound is also the treatment for other wounds.
Which is because when you obtain the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines and sew it and prepare it properly, then place over it a powder that promotes healing.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that wound ointments which are at your disposal until they turn into hard stones and close the wounds, and ensure they are healed and watched; then care for it in the same way as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
However, if the medicines are not at your disposal, then place on it immediately, as soon as it begins to bleed, a cloth of wool or cotton, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because for simple wounds you do not need any other medicine.
However, if you fear that the wound may spread to the main members, then it is necessary for you to immerse a piece of wool in oil of good quality or in rosemary oil, and place it around the area between the armpits and under the shoulders.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, because this happens several times, then cauterize that with black henbane juice, especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and made a penetrating exit into its cavity.
And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than the one which is in the small intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not heal from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, and their magnitude within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
However, if the wound proceeds from a foreign body, and you obtain it while fresh, reduce it according to your judgment with which you also reduce the intestines in the same manner.
However, if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then strengthen that with oil over the discolored area, so that blood flow comes out, because in the foreign body there are veins and arteries.
And then incise that which is another ligament, and place two ends of the oil dependent from the part below the wound, so that you may have relief on yourself for the attraction of it and the fall of the foreign body and the emission of the arm of the wound.
"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
"When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men, because I have seen that one who was wounded in his belly with the stroke of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and thus air and wind came out from him.
"Then I pursued the cure of him already, since he was not finished in his healing, but rather I continued to refine it until the inside is healed and the place is consolidated.
"And I, seeing the place already consolidated, informed the patient that he might encounter an adverse event in his belly; and he did not meet with any bad event, but rather returned to his usual habits of eating and drinking, and then he entered a bath and was exercised in his words.
"And some experienced ones say that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then it should be tied like this: that you take ants with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants on the two lips of the wound with its mouth open; thus when it takes hold of them and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And you should place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
And you should sew up that and the wound; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be bound with fine suture made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, since it is more needle-like; and you should take the end of this intestinal thread, and ensure it is very thin, and then bind the end of it with a thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew up the intestine with it, and reduce it in the rupture.
And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
However, if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is not only a slight tear, but it will not heal completely.
On the treatment of pustules and fistulas.
Sure, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And fistula according to truth is a nodular ulcer, hard, white, without pain, and with which there is an indentation like the indentation of a bird's feather; and because of this it is named alocus risatus, that is, pain.
And in some men it is moist, which causes the arm to be weak; and quickly after the moisture has been removed, within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is found, and it is small, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And it is important for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which are created through surgical intervention with the hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; for some of them lead to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or to the intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed like those of the hand and foot; and among these are those that affect a main part and its neighbors.
Therefore, among these fistulas, the one that follows this manner is difficult to heal and does not respond to treatment, and with it comes work and ignorance.
And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you expect and hope for its cure, and you wish to gain knowledge about it, then take a probe of iron or silver, and if the fistula follows a straight path, examine it with the probe.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is easily bent and follows the twist.
And if the fistula has terrible words, it is not possible for you to interpret them over it with a tent.
Therefore, irrigate the openings one by one, because the moisture used to irrigate them will go through the other openings and flow from there.
And then inquire diligently, according to what method you can know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with terrible openings, and all of this is under your strength, with your reasoning, with which you reason with the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be your compression with your hand on the area, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
And when you have stood on all these causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula is apparent nearby or in a safe place, distant from the joint, or from nerves, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Then dry the fistula according to what was said before about its nature, and remove whatever is in that filter and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the opening of the flesh, or of pus and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
Based on the provided context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the pattern you've provided, here's my best guess for a translation of this sentence:
And then restore it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should investigate that area and dry it out according to what we have recommended, unless you find any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it away until all of the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water to promote healing until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and instead throws out pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you should uncover it again carefully and thoroughly scrape and clean it with strong vinegar, and then restore it.
Therefore, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you should know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, so in this case your task is only to alleviate the suffering as much as possible.
And if the bone is slightly damaged or within your power to extract it, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones [fragments], then carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any remnants with your strength.
However, if you encounter any resistance from the moist areas, and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then place something on the wound that can soften it, and leave it until those bones are surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and keep the incision constricted which you have made during your operation.
Furthermore, if you fear [that the wound will heal], place a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments on it, for when those ligaments have rotted away and the bones are separated from them, the removal and attraction of those [bones] is eased.
"But if it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bone, and only its surface is affected by decay, then scrape off that part alone until the blackness and decay are removed, and then heal the wound.
"But if the decay has affected a large part of it and the corruption has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close up that area and cut into it until reaching the point where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it heals.
"And I recommend to you this thing that happened to a man in his thigh, as an example and aid for your operation.
"There was a young man around 30 years old who experienced pain in his thigh. Within the deeper parts of his body, there was an accumulation of matter that spread to the thigh, and this matter formed a large abscess with pus, and it was not caused by an external factor.
"And so the time passed with that due to the error of the physicians until the abscess burst, and foul-smelling matter flowed from it. His treatment was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and there were made in him many orifices which all discharged pus and the humors of the body.
"And then a multitude of doctors gathered around for two years, but none of them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
"And he saw the man's thigh and the matters that flowed from him through those openings of his great body; and already the man's body was entirely swollen and his color was yellowish.
"And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings until it reached the bone.
"And then I carefully examined all the openings and found that they penetrated to every part of the thigh.
"And then I cut and incised into one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found to be corrupt, already decayed, blackened, and rotten; and already a part of the thigh had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
"And then I scraped away what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
"And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather the corruption which I had cut out and scraped away, and I had already removed it.
"And then I applied healing medicines to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
And I will then re-examine and uncover the bones according to the previous examination, and find continuous corruption with the bones.
And I will seal that which appears to me due to that corruption, and then I was forced to make the cure of him and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I uncovered him again and did not stop cutting the bones piece by piece, particularly forcing his restoration, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm's width of him, from which I extracted his marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
And no further iteration or section of him is necessary except for the disposition of his weakness and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death in him, because he was constantly fainting due to excessive bad evacuation.
Therefore, he was healed by complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and the disposition of him in his body has been well done and his strength has returned to him; and he walks in his usual ways and no harm has come to him in any way.
This text appears to be discussing a surgical procedure involving prominent bones. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Sure, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
And it is necessary that the stitching be done gradually over the affected area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, then forceful stitching should be applied again.
And if the bone is not prominent and one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from every side; and place a stick underneath, and then stitch that of the first part where the corruption has entered until the stitching of the other part is continuous.
And let the stitching be according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupt joint, and stitch the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but dangerous.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary for you to inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and that you scrape away that part, and cleanse it according to every possibility that is available to you, and with each difficulty rectify it as best as you can, when a vein or nerve does not contradict you.
And know that the tools and saws used for cutting these bones depend on the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, their delicacy, their largeness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare all kinds of suitable instruments for each operation.
And know that this operation requires you to have the appropriate tool; since you are well-versed and knowledgeable in the ways of this art, and you have seen many illnesses, you should already know which instrument is suitable for each illness.
And I, at the end of this chapter, will list the instruments that you should have ready as essentials, with which you will proceed to perform your duties, testing them on others first. Type/Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Large form of another saw:
Type/Form of file Let the head of this file be in the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points should be like those of an awl.
"And it is not advisable to do anything other than gently rub the joints when they are inflamed, or if the mouth (of the wound) is very large.
"A smaller form of razor
"Lat." or "Latin
"Another type of saw should be made: it should be an arched shape with the iron part more curved and the wooden handle parts decently made. "Shape of it" or "Its shape
"A razor in which there is a concavity (hollow part).
"Another subtle type of razor" or "Another fine-edged razor
"A razor with a curved edge
"Form of a small razor resembling a hook
"Another smaller form of bone cutting tool
"Form of another instrument similar to a saw with the end resembling a saw blade, used in many places on the bone.
"Form of a saw suitable for use in perforating bones.
"And the end is triangular with a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise, it should be that all the reasons we have given for razors and scissors and saws apply.
Of amputating limbs and of the sawing of bones.
The limbs may be amputated for either intrinsic or extrinsic reasons: if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption may spread to a member which has not been affected by any cause; in such cases, it is necessary for you to amputate that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or greater evil that afflicts the limb.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black, until it seems to you that fire has burnt it, or perhaps the darkness extends to where the putrefaction has entered that member and takes over the entire body; then you should amputate it immediately.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a poisonous strike, such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a toad and similar things.
And if the corruption or swelling is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow any space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that (area) from the root of the finger to prevent corruption from spreading to the rest of the arm.
And if it progresses further, then you should incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption continues to progress and surrounds the elbow, then it is a deadly sign for the patient; and administering another treatment for this at that point is like throwing away virtue (i.e., it's useless).
Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise it up to one of the joints.
And if it spreads to the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it spreads into the leg, then you should incise the thigh up to the joint of the leg.
And if the corruption has already reached the leg, then there is nothing to do but dismiss (the patient) and leave him to die.
Based on the context and structure of the text, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over him from all sides so that the healthy area does not touch, and that a tight and purulent bandage come to the patient.
But if there is bleeding when operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully or place some powder that restrains the blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the afflicted member with a bandage that is suitable, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that if this happens to a man in his foot, the same accident that I and you have mentioned, which is that it causes blackness in his foot due to burning, similar to a fire burn.
And that corruption first happens in the toe until it spreads throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepares for himself pus which he sends to the affected member with great force and vehemence, causing him pain and burning, and then cuts off that foot up to the joint, and becomes healthy.
It happened to him many times that same corruption in the big toe of his right hand.
And then it came to me, and I realized that I should expel that excess fluid with water that was placed on the hand of medicines; near the purification of his body; and the excess fluid did not come out and began to go to the other side until it started in the hand.
And he asked me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do it because I was hoping for the expulsion of that excess fluid, and more than anything I feared the amputation of his dead hand, because the virtue of the patient lay in castration.
And after he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it came to me that the man had prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and he was cured.
And I have included this story only to be of help concerning that which is caught in this illness, and that it may be a sign by which it is indicated and according to which it should be treated.
About the care of sinews and the quality of enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is over it is also thin like a fine cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it does not press on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula.
If the space is prolonged until corruption affects a member, it is called a fistula and not ulcer.
And the treatment for it is that you sew up that cord as it is rolled up, especially when it is thinned out and made like a cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that this corruption has not reached any other consequence, and there is a little flesh left on the cord, then you treat it with an enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the arm has a fetid odor, then treat it with an enema of Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey, mixed in equal parts in a vessel, and boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
Then you take from it the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; and enema the sinus with that, and strengthen its orifices, and let the medicine stay there for the duration of two hours.
And then extract it with disdain; and do this for as many days as necessary until the wound is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And at times it is irrigated with water of ashes, when this medicine is not available; and it is that you take the ashes of grape vines, and put them in water; and then use that to irrigate until you are certain that the wound is closed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then irrigate them with water and honey mixed well together, and also irrigate them with wine and honey mixed together, because by the property of honey it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when in the wine there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this a few times and are certain that the wound has healed, then irrigate them with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is that you take of the ointment called diaphenicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you irrigate them with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is too narrow to receive the cannula of the clyster, then you should widen it little by little with an iron [instrument], and place a bandage wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened.
And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then you should bring its lips together with stitches and leave it in such a way that the clyster can enter without additional effort.
And if the orifice of which the arm is raised to the higher parts above, then dry it in the lowest place that is in it so that the arm runs below, for when the arm is constricted in the narrowness of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the area of the lower bone as you wish, then make an opening through which the arm can pass more easily, according to what seems appropriate to you, and ensure that there are no impediments or obstacles in its path.
But that which is on the opening of the wound should always be changed, so that what is absorbed from it by the arm may be removed. And to know if that which flows from his arm is too much or too little, whether it is digested or undigested.
And thus you should consider the location of that wound, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess within it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is laid on the opening of the wound has adhered or nearly adhered, then you should detach it on the third day, and when you uncover the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Based on the context and the pattern of translation from the provided sentences, here's a line-by-line attempt to translate the given text:
And if from the chest after a few days indigestion persists, then know that the chest is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the chest is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply a drying treatment with medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they will be dry like diaphanous ointment when applied to remove excess fluid from the body.
And the most effective treatment is to take diaphanous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it warmly with ancient honey in its substance. Then prepare this mixture with the patient, and use it.
And when there is no ointment, make it seem so by taking mastic, aloe and sesame seeds, grinding all together into a powder and sprinkling it over honey that is being heated on the fire. Then line a cloth with this mixture and place it firmly on the chest; or you can also mix this powder with the honey you have previously thickened, and then spread it on a cloth and apply it to the chest.
And sometimes it is administered with him long-rooted aristolochia, lily of the valley root (which is lily of the valley), and flour made from barley and centaury. Use these simple or compound ingredients: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the honey you have heated; then use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in his bowels, and it is already spreading to the bones or other hard members or ligaments; at this point, you treat him with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
Of the treatment of carbuncles and infected nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputations.
Carbuncle is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also form on other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is less valued, or it is an abscess from another abscess, or it becomes corrupt, and it throws pus into the root of the nail, and it corrodes that totally, and soon its corruption reaches the bone, so that it has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is lame, and its color turns black.
Therefore, when you have that with water as we said in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the superfluousness that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very useful in this.
Here's the translation of your text:
But if corruption has already affected the bone, then you should cut out that bone and remove it, for no time will heal a corrupted bone.
But if you see the decay and corruption going into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints according to how much you remember it, and then cure that part until it is healed.
But if there is a bruise or cut on the fingernail and it causes intense pain, then you should first bleed the patient at the beginning. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh beneath the nail, because you will cause intense pain for the patient and it will cause excessive growth of the adjacent skin in that place; and then cure that place with water that relieves pain.
But this excessive growth, which is born in the hands of some men, is very fleshy all over, and it is very easy to cut through their bones, or it is very easy to cut through their nails.
And some of them are born at the base of the joints, or they grow in some of the said joints. But one who is born with certain nodes on the finger does not suffer greatly, and one who is born with strong joints suffers more.
And for those who are born fleshy, the incision should be light, and you must cut it with a Latin spatula.
But for one who is born with the thinness of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of their infection.
But for one who is born with the nodes on the finger, you should cut the flesh at the beginning round into the bone, and then cauterize it with an appropriate iron, and then care for that until it heals.
But the healing that occurs between their obvious nodes, either by the nature of man who is born thus, or by the healing of a wound, or by the burning of fire, or by resemblance, then you should cut away that healing until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between them cloths soaked in rose oil to prevent them from healing too easily, and separate them or place a thin lead sheet between them until they heal as necessary.
It seems like you're providing sentences from an old medical text, possibly written in Occitan or Catalan due to the similarities with Spanish, Italian, French, and Latin. I'll do my best to translate them into English while preserving the original meaning as much as possible.
Of vices, there are varieties.
Vices are varicose veins, which are thick, swollen veins filled with melancholic excess that often appear in the limbs of the body, most commonly in the legs. They are especially common among travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times, along with a strong evacuant, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
However, their treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The incision is done in this manner: first, soak the leg with hot water until the thick blood, which is coagulated in the leg, dissolves. Then strengthen the leg of the patient at the upper part of the thigh, from the lower part of the knee to the groin, with a bandage. Then make one or two or three wide incisions on the vein, and then lift the black blood with your left hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until you have removed as much blood as you desire and believe is sufficient for the patient's benefit.
And then bind it up, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods.
And continue the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this will be beneficial for the patient.
But the elevation of their [limbs] should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then place it in a bath and soak the leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent. Or if there is no bath available, exercise the limb vigorously until it becomes hot.
And then dry the ligature on the right side of the vein by making an incision in the hollow or behind it you will find the nerve, or lower down you will find the tendon.
And then open the ligature with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears sensitive, and it is there that you will find the swelling that turns black when pressed.
And then, having evacuated [the blood], if you see that vein become white, it should be tied off.
And then place the vein below [the incision] and raise it up until it is released from the ligature, and suspend it with a silk thread.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
And then raise it and slice it into the posterior section behind the ankle, and then extract it and lift it until it is pushed out by the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you have extracted it from the highest section or furthest of all sections, until everything is pushed out; and then slice that.
And if it does not obey your attempt to extract and lift, then insert a double-bladed needle with a strong thread and tie it off, and extract it, or insert the reed underneath and turn your hand around until everything is expelled. And ensure that it is not cut; because if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to lift that part and it may harm the patient due to that injury.
And once everything has been expelled, then place over the wound location wool soaked in oil and both rosemary oil and plain oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the intestine is twisted with tortuosity that it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you should cut along that throughout its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift all of it.
And you should be careful with your section to avoid cutting the vein and hurting it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it up; and keep your prudence in this.
The shape of the wound through which the vessel has been cut
It is not sharp like a hook nor does it have a sharp tip to avoid hurting the vein; it should be thick and flexible, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; thus, it has an unnecessary thickness as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein in the leg
This vein is produced in the thighs in hot lands, such as in Athens in Arabic lands and in hot and dry Indian lands of little fertility where there is neither grass nor trees.
And it is produced strongly in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its formation is due to putrefaction that comes from the intestines, like the venom of snakes and worms and scorpions and worms generated between the intestines and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this condition is that this vein appears in the thigh as a violent inflammation; and then the area swells up; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, looking like a plant's root.
And then when the extremity emerges from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a weight of lead which weighs between one and two drachms, knot it and leave the lead hanging from his thigh.
And each time you see any part emerging outward from him for some reason, wrap it in lead and tie it off. And if the part is prolonged, then you should cut off a section of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut it too close until it has been completely expelled, because if you cut it too short, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and pus in that place and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be gently pulled out and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from him, so that no part remains in his body for any reason.
And from this vein there emerges in some men something that is the length of five palms and ten fingers, and I have already heard of one that was twenty palms long.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the opening and pierce it with a long hole through his body until everything that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then treat it according to the treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has large bulges, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him with many openings, and it exits from each opening as a branch.
And therefore treat it as we said in the division and with that which is mentioned above.
On cutting over worms generated under the skin, and it is called cattle sickness.
This illness is named in some regions cattle sickness because many times it befalls the oxen and there is a worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and it goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and its progression is felt from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as it happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then it very quickly destroys it and enters and destroys the eye, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure this and extract it, then it is not done unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you have something over it and something under it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry over it and extract it.
And if it is rotten in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until death, and the most feared cause is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that [something] has reached near the head towards the eye, then strengthen the eyelid with a strong constriction, and quickly close it, and remove [the object]; and it is necessary for the patient to use purgative medicines for evacuating bad putrid humors, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
On cutting for earache.
This illness is called earache in our land, and it is pain that comes to certain members, and then changes from member to member.
And I have seen it according to what I will tell you. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm ascending to this place, but lighter than being able [to move], as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
And then go away from that painful place and insert yourself into the muscle, and then stay here for one hour.
And then run to the other body until you reach the other arm.
And then recount to me that you revolved through the entire body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at the transformation of him and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my eyes in that manner, but I have never seen words that cause pain being transferred from member to member. But I did not see it with the eyes as I do in a woman.
And I did not think that this was anything other than because the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and in her it appeared to the touch that windiness had been transferred.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and with moist bodies and closed veins.  /> E en aqueles qui son delicioses e am cors sec, es necessari que lo mestre sia avertit de le paratges de l’aigua e del foc, e de les calideses e frigiditats, e de los quals son convenientz per lo tracte, e de los quals non.  /> And in those who are delicate and with dry bodies, it is necessary that the master be skilled in the properties of water and fire, and of heat and cold, and of which ones are suitable for the treatment, and which are not.
And when you want to treat the patient and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said, then you strengthen over that area, and leave it slightly and gently until that trapped wind is released, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it by purging the body and with something that expels wind, and treat those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of serpentine and the like.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their types and the parts of the body in which they are lodged, because their diversity is that there are those with large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, solid ones; and there are those with three edges, and among them there are those with tongues; and there are those with barbs.
And of the signs of the injury it is when an arrow strikes him, and it pierces the bone, and it exits from the cavity that is above the brain, for this occurs due to the strong force, and darkness before the eyes, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile, and strongly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the place of the wound white moisture like dust comes out, and his eyes are like the wateriness of meat.
And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
But the signs of an arrow wound to the heart are as follows: it is near the left nipple, and one feels with that movement as if it has struck a hard object, and it is not a superficial wound; furthermore, the movement of the arrow is like the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foetid odour, and fainting; and thus you know that death approaches without delay.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are: frothy blood coming from the wound, and the veins near the neck are distended, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they exhale a great deal of breath, and they crave cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the peritoneum which is in the abdomen, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and there will be a great deal of pain with intense suffering and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles will not be well.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound.
If the arrow strikes the belly and is embedded in the person, if there is any opening of the wound, or cloth, or intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for the cure by extracting the arrow,
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine comes out, and there is any process that causes it to come out from the parts, and severe pain occurs in the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, joints, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, pelvis, thigh and their similar parts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you this about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand for yourself how to heal from them.
The reason is that in a man an arrow was stuck in his tear duct of the eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side, leaving its head in his ear, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden and only a small tip remained attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with lion's iron, on which there were no fletchings.
And if the patient is a judge, do not attribute this misfortune to his evil eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a man of Cretia that had struck him in the throat. This was an Arabic arrow, one of those with feathers; and when I inserted my hand between two fleshy parts, it was already submerged in his throat. And so I skillfully pulled it out along with the arrowhead, and then I extracted it, and thus healed the man of Cretia.
And I extracted another arrow from a man that had struck him in the belly, and I thought he would die because of it; but after thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I inserted my hand over the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and no further misfortune befell him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over it; and after seven years, the arrow emerged through the flesh of the wound.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound had healed within her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm to any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell into his face and the wound was healed and the arrow broken, but he did not find much pain here, and he had similar marks as these.
And extract the arrow from the man of the king's princes, which was shot into the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to treat him shortly after the arrow penetrated, within three days.
And then I found the arrow wound to be very narrow; and then I explored it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a point below his right ear, and then I suspected that this point was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the area with attracting and digestive properties, hoping that the swelling would subside so that the arrow's location could be revealed to me, in order to act upon it.
And no significant accident occurred in the area to indicate that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days, but no accident occurred; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient recovered from the extraction over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it. )))
And then I placed on the wound a sharp, corrosive medicine for several days until the fire opened up, and with a probe, I explored it and found the subtle tip of an arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the medicine in the wound so that it became visible to me, and I let time pass with this for four months.
And after the wound had become inflamed, and it was possible for me to insert the tweezers into it, and they remained there without obstruction, I did not stop trying and inventing with various means until one day I managed to extract it with tweezers made for this purpose, as will be described at the end of this chapter. And then I healed the wound.
And while some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I managed to restore it and heal the wound completely, and the patient was cured entirely without any recurrence.
And I will explain to you the technique of removing certain arrows so that you can follow this rule and its meaning, which I have not yet explained, because the principles of this art and their definitions are not understood through narrative alone, nor do they understand them in books.
And the skilled craftsmen compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when it occurs.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they enter, or by contraries of the other parts.
And that which is thrown into the place where it entered, either is an arrow coming from a fleshy place and is pulled out and extracted.
And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it was caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are made easier.
Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave that one for some days and repeat that with attraction and moisture each day, and then it will be extracted.
And if it does not obey your extraction after some days, then you should perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow has been hidden within the body and is concealed from feeling, then you should inquire with a probe, and if you feel it, then remove it using various instruments suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in its path, then you should cut into the wound until it is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
And if the arrow is lodged in the ears or other bony structures, then you should cut away all the flesh around it with all the skill you can muster; and then work on extracting it, twisting and breaking the bones as necessary until the arrow gives way.
And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it may be, then use a tourniquet with your hand and forceps for all parts until it obeys; and handle it with utmost delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and that it is done with great difficulty in removing it and its extraction.
And if you cannot do so in your time, then leave it for some days until the parts around it soften, and then attempt again when it is less painful. But if there is a counter-indication of bleeding, then administer what we have said in the chapter on treatment.
And beware of causing injury to a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer caution in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility and slowness and steadiness, as I have recommended to you.
And therefore, adjust the arrow so that the patient is in a position according to the figure as you should have placed the shot of the arrow in him, because it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
If it is lodged in the bone, then you should twist and turn the lance according to its opposite direction until the arrow penetrates into the bone, expand it at that point, and then extract it.
If not, leave it there for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then you should remove that with it.
But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer a probing, then you should insert that, if it is blunt, with a concave instrument so that the concavity of it fits into the back of the arrow, and then remove that with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you should remove that with a strong instrument entering it, because the arrow is weakened by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh in which the tip is located, as much as possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the stomach, or the bladder, or the side, and it is accessible so that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
Their extremities resemble the beak of a bird, made like a saw, which grips onto the arrow so that it does not slip away.
And of these are made various types of points, large, few and finer, according to the size of the arrow and its slenderness, as well as the width of the wound and the constriction caused by it.
similar to a beam, so that its entry into the curved arrow is facilitated and it is propelled by that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins commonly used for phlebotomy are 36, of which there are 16 in the head: two pulsatile veins near the ears called auriculars; two branches on each temple; and two veins on each lacrimal duct of the eyes called aspicientz; a vein in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugulars at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip, these are called angelic; and there are two veins below the tongue. Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And in the foot and leg, there are three veins: one of them is beneath the curve of the wild boar's tendon; and the second is called saphenous, and its location is beneath the domestic pig's leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is beneath the wild boar's leg; and in the leg are other similar veins.
The treatment for the veins near the ears is for old cataracts, migraines, headaches, and ancient ulcers of the head.
And the method of bleeding these veins is as I have told you: it is that the patient's head be shaved, and the patient's head be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a broad cloth with good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two [veins] and their locations are near the ears on both sides of the head; and you will seek this with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of these [veins] with your finger, here is the sign.
Then take the incising scalpel, and it is this one that you insert under the vein in the bend until the lancet reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon towards the divided parts above and cut the vein with an incisive incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or around that; and make as much blood come out as you want.
Then strengthen with bandages and leave it until it heals.
And as has been mentioned at the beginning of this book, the incision and its cauterization are described here.
But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the help of phlebotomy is for migraines of ancient origin and severe headaches, persistent cataracts, and excessively acute bodily humors.
And the method of phlebotomizing those veins is as I have instructed you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until both veins are clearly visible and palpable by touch, and demonstrate their pulse under your finger; then you can proceed with certainty.
Then raise the tendon above the vein towards the divided parts with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below it, and lift the vein upwards; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then unbind the patient's bandage, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then press firmly on that spot with cotton wool and cloth, holding it tightly in place until it is healed.
And already the memory of them, and their inscription, and their attraction are at the beginning of this book.
And thus the bloodletting of the frontal vein is similar to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting for this is as I advise you; thus, the patient should tighten their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, and this is its form:
Place the pointed end of the lancet on that vein and strike it with a hammer or other heavy object in the manner described, allowing the blood to flow as much as you wish; then unbind the patient's wound and hold it tightly until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad bloodletting instrument, but it is not necessary that the bloodletting instrument be sharp like the others, rather it should be blunt, and let it cut through transversely, because the bone is close by and very easily broken by the bloodletting instrument when it is thin.
This passage appears to be discussing the treatment of eye issues related to inflammation and discharge. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And the nature of phlebotomy is such that the patient should have their head bound with a bandage, and then you should perform phlebotomy on them, while standing over their head.
And the phlebotomy should be performed along the length with a small amount of blood taken at a time, because in that area there is little flesh; and if the needle is fine, the end of it may break easily.
And then let the blood run as much as is necessary for you, and press on that wound, and bind it tightly for one night, and then release it.
But phlebotomy of the nose vein is beneficial for acute fever and severe headache, and for facial illnesses and migraines that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the technique of this phlebotomy is that the patient should tie their head and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long fleam and place it in the middle of the nasal bridge along its length, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Therefore you should gradually remove your hand with the fleam and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it for one night, because it heals easily.
The sentence seems to discuss the adverse effects of bloodletting from both sides (veins), mentioning conditions like epilepsy, leprosy, various illnesses, and corrosive ulcers. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient must lie on their back with their head bound; and let the practitioners be positioned over the patient's head, and the patient should be sitting on a stool.
And then proceed with phlebotomy by opening the vein with an ample incision gradually; and then extract blood according to measured quantity or as many times as necessary; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and tightly bind both veins to prevent the patient from bleeding out, and leave them until morning when the wound is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of the engorged veins is that it cures small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the method of this phlebotomy is that you should sit the patient in front of you, and bind their neck with a bandage, and then turn back their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the distinguishing feature of each is their darkness compared to both, and this is more so because there are small black veins around them; and then incise each with a sharp incision.
If there is doubt about which one to choose and you don't know which of them it is, then you should perform an incision on the larger one and the more obvious one.
And make an incision in the two veins that are located above the lips.
But of the two veins that are beneath the tongue, it is most appropriate to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein, especially when there are predispositions in the hypoglossal nerve, at the illness of the uvula, and at illnesses of the mouth.
The method of phlebotomizing those veins is to make the patient sit between your hands in front of you, lift their tongue, and look under the tongue. From one side of the vein will come dark blood, and from the other side light blood.
Then phlebotomize each vein; and be careful not to press too hard with your hand while phlebotomizing those, because beneath them are arteries.
The veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those commonly used by all men. Their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either they use a fleam with myrtle or olive oil, subtly declining; or they use a scalpel to cauterize and call it "alnessil," and this is its form.
It should be the sharp edges of it, and as many times as necessary, and it is suitable for opening the full, obvious large veins, and those that contain thick, disturbed blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser sharpness and more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for bloodletting of the subtle veins that contain subtle yellowish blood.
But the advantage of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it extracts the blood of those who are suffering from gout and colic, and from that which causes swelling of the feet and belly.
And it is advisable for the bloodletter, when performing that bloodletting, to be very careful and cautious with it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs and strikes in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to perform that bloodletting with a sharp fleam, but rather to incise first with a blunt instrument.
And if the basilica does not appear in a clear manner, then you should leave that one and move to another, or search for some branches of it; or you may perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is manifested; and afterwards, apply the fleubotomi alnessil similarly as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the area until you recognize the pulse location, and then place a cloth over it with care; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using the fleubotomi alnessil as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in some part of the area.
And when you see, as the ligature tightens, swelling in the place that you have covered with cloth, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is from the artery of the blood; and at this time you should cut and press your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood has stopped flowing, which is usually the case, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And protect the patient from their own spittle and be careful not to let it fall on them for several days until they are healed.
But if the blood has not been cut off and you do not have medicine at hand, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity is constricted and the blood is cut off. Or take a scraper of fistic, make an incision with it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein's place with a tight bandage, and bind it with linen and powder for another day.
And then if the blood has been cut off, it is good; and if not, then treat it with the remedy that was mentioned before to stop the bleeding at the place of the powder.
And stopping the bleeding from them is difficult in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful for extracting blood from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
The advantage of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and heals the infirmities of the eyes.
It is particularly advisable in this case, if you wish to perform phlebotomy with the olive tree or myrtle needle; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves left behind.
However, it happens that the swelling is very light in some men, so that it is not noticed at the first incision; but do not pay attention to that swelling either.
The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and hope for improvement, as well as precaution against illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins in the elbow, namely: cephalic, dark and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter after a meal, when signs of fullness appear.  (Note: "fusca" is likely a misspelling or misunderstanding of "median cubital", another name for the median antebrachial vein.)
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure. Here's a line-by-line translation:
"Phlebotomy (bloodletting), when administered, is most effective and necessary for this purpose, whether at night or during the day, at any time.
"A child should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only be bled from the fourth to the seventh month, and those over sixty years of age should not be bled.
"And before someone is bled in any manner, they should purge their bowels with a leonine clyster (enema), if there are many retained fissures, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities of the corrupt bowels into the bloodletting, which can harm the main members.
"Patients who are certainly suffering from nausea or drunkenness should not be bled until it has passed; nor those recovering from illness or fever, nor hydropic patients. Phlebotomy should also be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive sexual activity, hard work, or fasting and vigils, and any other cause that weakens the vital force of either the body or soul.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible for him to do so.
And then enter a bath if no cause prevents it, or exercise through some activity so that the blood is thinned.
And perform the phlebotomy on him in the morning, around the third hour, as we have said.
And ensure that the patient's feet are protected on that day from all animal ailments, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily ailments, such as labor and unnecessary pain, and coitus and its likes.
And at his bedside, have the causes of use be present with aromatics and fragrances, and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who must be bled.  (In this context, the phlebotomist is the person performing the bloodletting.)
And then the patient should extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub it with their hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it two times.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And before the incision, it is necessary that the person who is to be phlebotomized rubs their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly felt.
And before the phlebotomist anoints the patient's vein with a small amount of proper oil; and then places the index finger of his left hand over that vein, below the place where he wants to make the incision, so that the vein is moved slightly, and the blow is stopped because of the veins that are found in this way like fleeing cords, the phlebotomist must find one that is full of airiness, and when he places his finger on it, it contracts under the finger, and it is discovered to the phlebotomist; and the patient does not move the vein, and if he moves it, that vein is narrow.
Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be attentive and concerned about all these things.
And then remove the finger, but if the vein is opened in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you should try again in another spot slightly below that place, or above it with haste, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes feverish, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not apply the bandage tightly, because the heat will draw out the pus quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
Then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the opening is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not flow in the desired amount, then repeat the bleeding at that spot according to what is right and adjust the opening slightly, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for in many men a small opening is necessary when the area is inflamed.
But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat [the bleeding] on it, for it does not accept any action from you; and place on it some of the oil wound dressing, for it relieves the body of blood. And this is better in this case than other oils.
Similarly, administer the oil wound dressing in all bloodlettings where you must prohibit the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac alfadoc and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is thinned and turned back when it is thick.
And if in the place of bloodletting a large abscess has been formed, which occurs frequently and especially in those who have not been bled except for this time, or when the vein is scarcely opened, then you take and place on the affected area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly squeezed, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary that this be done near the exiting point of the blood from that vein or another vein.
And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place on that area some aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or some mint juice or camphor, or something similar to that.
And such abscesses and swellings frequently require bloodletting from the basilic vein.
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness there, keep your pressure on it, because that swelling is bad and dangerous; and then be careful not to place any cold compress on it, because the blood will flow profusely from the artery.
And make a plaster with water that has been boiled down to a syrup-like consistency, so that the area is hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the predominant color in their blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you should let it out until it becomes red; similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you should let it out until it becomes thinned; and likewise, if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has a need to extract blood in one sitting, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and that the incisions be wide.
And for someone who is weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw blood from them in several sittings, and the incision should be narrow.
And the best practice for phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse cut, not a prick.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from an excess flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
And if it is coldness due to a complexion, then before the bloodletting, infuse with syrup of myrrh or with scented syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or with very aromatic syrup.
And if a fainting occurs during bloodletting and it is due to the loss of much blood, then one should give to drink water from meat and very fragrant syrup; and use aromatization with aloe, and anoint their feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And whoever wants to stretch their arm and dissolve their blood according to need, it is necessary for the person from whom much blood is being drawn, and whose strength is weak, that they evacuate the blood little by little, which is according to the quantity of their strength in continuous days.
But whoever wants to stretch their arm and expel their blood again at the appropriate time, and their body is strong, then they should do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Here's my attempt at translating this line:
This text appears to be discussing a medical procedure related to bloodletting or phlebotomy. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And it is not necessary when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the openings of the vein are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to exit, that you press on that area with great force and slightly extend the arm, because this is too severe.
Wait until it has been properly blood-let according to the method; or remain there with the sharpness of the blood-letting instrument, which is coagulated blood in the vein openings; or place on that some *tyriaca alfarach* or *sagzenea*, and press lightly on it until the blood has come out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in the same place or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is blood-let in place of the "fusca" or "basilica", when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the method of blood-letting for him is that the patient place his hand in hot water until the lancet becomes red hot and the vein appears clearly.
And immediately a bandage should be tightly wrapped around the wound with a moderate pressure; and immediately perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor along the length.
And make the incision wide and perform phlebotomy with that which you use to bleed on the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is inhibited, then immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your goal.
However, if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and it is appropriate to place the body of the blood in hot water during winter time.
And bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves afterwards.
And the phlebotomy of the little toe of the right foot is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its bleeding is that you wrap the hand tightly with a bandage or with your hand, after you have placed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and well visible; and then bleed it transversely; and if you incise it completely, this will not cause harm.
And take care not to burn your hand with phlebotomy, for the nerves mentioned are exposed and without flesh.
And immediately immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and it will become blocked.
And when the blood has been extracted to the necessary amount, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you should do this for every narrow vessel.
However, the benefit of phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
And perform phlebotomy on him in a similar manner as you did with the other one.
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus and retained menses, and for diseases of the hips and old ulcers on the thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the method of phlebotomy for this is that the patient immerse their foot in hot water and make a friction on it until the veins appear; then bind the ankle with a band; and where the vein appears, you should prick with the needle, and from there the veins branch out on the surface of the foot like roots.
And therefore you should perform a phlebotomy on the widest part of the leg below the knee and up to the ankle, because it is better and healthier.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that are underneath it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy in such a way that you cut through [the skin], as if you were trying to slice it open.
And let the phlebotomies be visible.
However, if the outflow of blood is inhibited; then you should immerse his foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it is fully evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy a little higher, because the place is healthier; and do not fear evil effects, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And likewise, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, below the knee and above the wild part.
The remedy for his phlebotomy is at the pain in the hip when it is due to excess blood.  (Note: "caut" here means "excessive" or "too much")
And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath, and is quick and strong in cupping his back from the back of the neck to the heel on four spots covered with a long, fine bandage, because it only appears this way.
And so when it appears, then you should bleed according to each part as is possible and according to the transverse [vein], which is better; either incise or dry up that part, because his place is healed.
And it is very common in many men; and if you find this [condition], but it doesn't seem to affect everything, then bleed some part of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot between the big toe and the little toe.
And be careful with the nerves, and let run as much blood as you want.
Then immediately unbind the ligature and place on the bleeding site cotton and firmly press the area, for it heals lightly.
About cupping and the qualities of using them.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or crystal.
And cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
"And this puncture, which is without scarification, is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
"And the bloodletting treatments that are administered with scarification and blood extraction have fourteen locations on the body. One of these places where bloodletting is performed is at alnocrati, which is the lower part of the head; the middle location between the two parts of the neck; bloodletting under the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; bloodletting in the area of the shoulders; bloodletting in the alohoster area, which is at the end of the ribs; bloodletting on the palms; and bloodletting on the knuckles.
"Bloodletting does not extract blood from the smaller veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch the virtue through them, as happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
"However, if necessity requires bloodletting for an illness or a chronic condition, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle of the month, and at the end of the month, and at any time.
And thus when such events occur for any of those reasons, and especially if it is in the middle or third of the month, then order a bloodletting to be done because several hours have passed since the day.
And the reason for bloodletting from the neck is that when you apply it to the head and cause it to sink into the heels, but it should be an evacuation of the entire body.
And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
And it is not permissible to use for this purpose one who has a complete cold or who has a catarrh, because it causes great harm to him.
And therefore it is not suitable to use this for the elderly, whose heads are afflicted with coldness.
But for one who persists in this state, forgetfulness is induced upon him; and therefore it is necessary that you command the bleeder to pause his hand slightly with the bloodletting cup after each time, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But bloodletting from the elbow is in the location of phlebotomy from the vena fusca and the basilic vein: and for this you apply it for asthma, for constriction of breath, for cleaving of the instrument of breath, for cough, and for congestion.
And it is necessary that the ventouse be emptied a little, because if it is left there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the cupping (ventozacio) of Alhagdahan is used for pains in the head and eye pain, migraine, fever, and toothache; and it is an alternative to bloodletting from the vein.
And it's important to instruct the cupper (ventozador) not to press with scarification, so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
And cupping on the chin is used for ulcers in the mouth, gum disease, and similar conditions of the mouth, and it serves as an alternative to bloodletting from the vein on the lips.
But cupping that is done on both shins is used for cataplasms, which are made to induce heat.
And cupping on the inner sides of the armpits serves as an alternative to bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilic, ulnar, and cephalic veins, because it draws blood from all the smaller veins in the flesh that connect to these larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the person performing bloodletting not to proceed too forcefully with scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain underneath.
And it is a cupping glass with which one performs cupping on the back and treats the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers underneath.
And you should command the person performing bloodletting to use a large cupping glass and one made of tin, because the area requires strong suction; and the delicate and thin veins should be strongly scarified first.
However, cupping of the thighs is done more delicately, as it draws blood from the whole body, and it helps with old pains of the kidneys and liver, and bladder; and it induces menstruation, and it helps with flatulence and melancholy; and it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy of both saphenous veins, and the jugular vein, and of two cubits.
However, they greatly weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And the bloodletting of the jugular vein is similar to the bloodletting of both thighs.
And the quality of the positioning of the cupping glasses is to place the glass at the beginning on an empty stomach and apply it with warm suction, do not prolong the positioning of the cups but place them lightly, and leave them there for a short time, so that the humors may come to the place by natural path. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area become red and swollen, and the sign of blood appears.
And then you make an incision and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the condition of the body.
Because that person who has delicate skin and few pores should be incised only once and no more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the cupper to widen the incision a little and deepen it slightly, and always apply the suction gently.
And if the blood is thick, then you should incise twice, because in the first incision, the pathway is opened for the blood and its wateriness. But in the second [incision] to ensure thorough removal of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made to remove all of it.
And recently, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or only a small amount, a simple incision is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract more blood, we incise with a larger incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise through a deep incision.
And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
And if the person whose veins are thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be treated with milder, more open, and more resolving substances; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of sesame seed; and in winter, oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of garlic, and similar substances.
And if the excess is thick and greasy, then the oil should be of amaranth, or oil of lemon balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of dill, and their like.
However, if the person has wide pores and soft skin, it is necessary that they be forbidden from using oil, and it is necessary that for this person the areas for cupping be washed with vinegar or with fatty water of salt, or with water of sesame seed, or with water of borage, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of excessive moisture, wash his privates with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things.
And that one whose superfluidities are thick, wash his privates with old vinegar, or with water of hyssop (which is marjoram), or with infusion of anise, chamomile, and similar things.
And it is necessary that the washing be done before bathing; and it is necessary that it be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep right after the washing.
What must be observed in one who has been bled before a washing?
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who will perform the washing or who should be bled is choleric and hot-blooded with sharp and inflamed blood, then it is necessary that he take cooling remedies, such as sorrels (Rumex acetosa), endive, vinegar, lettuce, dry wine, syrup of roses, and similar things.
And let his food be like this: polenta (cornmeal mush), and the meat of lean birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
Here's the translation of your sentence:
"And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and cupping, the drink should be greater than the food.
"And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca alpharac or musk medicine, such as musk or alcelita, before bloodletting or cupping, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and they should not take that food.
"But the ventozas that are without scarification should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout area, and on the navel, in the joint areas, and the hollow of the elbow, because these members cannot tolerate scarification upon them.
"And these are not desired for any other purpose than to draw blood from a member, just as they place a ventosa on the breast in cases of nosebleed; and this is used so that the harsh viscous swelling of the member is dissolved, such as when placed on the abdomen and navel; because this rarifies the member and removes the pain, resolving the swelling.
"And it has been placed on the hemorrhoids when they occur in their inflammation or ulcer, because by virtue of its strong attraction, it quickly heals the inflammation and eradicates the ulcer from its place.
"Similarly, when flatulence is trapped in the liver or spleen.
"These flatulences should be treated only with suction, and sometimes they may also require heat.
"And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water to patients with liver ailments.
"And the reason for filling and increasing the size of the bladder is that it should contain only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked.
"Method of administering bladder with heat: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of air should be about half a palmful; and on the side of the patient, in the lower part of the abdomen, the incision should be small, just enough to insert a needle.
"It should be made of thick, smooth ram's horn or citrus peel, so that it does not disturb the position of the limb on which it is placed.
"And in the middle of this, a transverse iron or steel rod should be inserted, on which a candle with fire is placed.
"And this bladder should be much larger than the one we have described, and smaller according to the patient's condition and the state of their ailment.
And the bloodletting for children and the weak is different from that of young people and those with larger bodies.
And the way to place this bloodletting tool with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with a decent amount of wood ash in front of a few beeswax candles, and place it in the middle of the transverse vertebra at the midpoint of the bloodletting site, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the hole we mentioned, until when we have the bloodletting tools ready and do not need to remove the finger and let the steam out over that hole, then the bloodletting tool will dissolve immediately.
And ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat this if you need to.
However, in the case of bloodletting for pleurisy, it is done with water, which does not have a transverse vertebra or hole, and it should only be placed on the patient's limb once it is filled with water.
And this is its form: And the larger this bloodletting tool is, the better, as it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Bloodsuckers are not applied to all members but only to those in which the placement of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the hands and gums and similar parts; or to a member that lacks flesh, such as the foot and the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that you have found in clean, standing water.
And let them be laid in clean water day and night until they are lethargic, ensuring that there is no remnant in their stomachs; and beforehand the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and then rub the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place them on the patient.
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to suck out the place with a cupping glass, it is more useful for healing.
And otherwise, wash the place with vinegar and then with warm water; and then rub and squeeze it.
And if the body's blood is prolonged near the placement of the bloodsuckers, and it oozes out, then you should dip a cloth in warm water and place it on top until the oozing subsides.
And if the blood is in abundance, then powder vitriol or other astringent substances over the area until the blood is stopped; or place cooked fava beans on the area and let them stay until they stick to the area and the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary, if possible, to use leeches for bloodletting.
And if leeches are not available, then wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the area until it draws blood; and then place something on it, for they quickly draw blood when they sense any blood.
And if you want them to fall off, powder a little bit of crushed aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will fall off quickly.
Thus begins the prologue of the third section: on restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations.
Oh son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the common people who have never read or studied the books of the ancients.
And because of this reason, it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it at any time whatsoever; and I have not applied it after, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And then I directed my attention to experiments and studies throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiments have passed; since I have shortened this for you others and delivered it from the length of explanation; and I have shortened it to the end of shortening; and shown it at the end of explanation; and formed in it many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections on the nature of bone fractures, and those necessary preliminaries before we begin to recall the memories of broken limbs and various parts of each one. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the subject matter; and the chapters at the understanding of which in the beginning is essential for the craftsmen and placed on the truth of these; so it shall be with you and those who are skilled or learn this noble art from you.
And so I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture, dislocation, twisting or falling, it is necessary for you to begin with phlebotomy or leeching of the affected area, or both at the same time, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness in virtue, if the patient is a child or an elderly person in decline, or if it is extremely hot or cold.
And so it should be satisfied with a diet of fresh herbs and birds' meat and crabs; and avoid heavy meats and filling oneself with all kinds of food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the absence of an abscess, and if you do not fear the loss of matter from the member.
And then return the patient to their previous diet with which they are accustomed.
And so when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat, rice, cabbage, peas, ox tripe, beans, fresh fish, fatty meats and similar ones. And with this diet, the healing of the fracture is done more gently and better.
And you should know that broken bones in the elderly and infirm cannot be healed or mended according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
However, nature always adjusts and connects over the broken bone from any similar cause, like glue in which it becomes thick and adheres and strengthens that until they are completely bonded together, until they reach the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at first, until some cause prevents it from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place food on the patient's table, foods that are heavy, sticky, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of breaks are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a break in the thigh bone is different from a break in the skull bone; and a break in the foot bone is different from a break in the hand bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the context provided, "Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa" likely means: Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
"Mota senhal de fractura del os" translates to: And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: it is crookedness of the bone, and swelling and prominence of the area felt, and so it is when we press on that area with your hand.
Therefore, when there is neither evident crookedness in the area nor pain felt upon your touch, and the patient does not experience great pain when you shake the bone, then it is not a fracture here.
However, it is possible that it may be a minor crookedness or small fissure, which should not be moved with your hand and by compression of the whole area; rather, place on him remedies of the kind that are remembered at this moment, which are suitable for the area; and then bind tightly with a fine bandage.
And know that the area, when it is bent and not split in two or anything else happens to it, as all parts are removed from their place, then it is necessary for you to begin immediately with the correction of it, having that which occurs in it an abscess be cautious.
And if an abscess forms, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; and then drain it in whatever way you can with lightness and skill.
And know that restoration and healing of it is easier than for the bone in which this happens.
Then strengthen that second one, so that the memory of him may return.
But if the satis is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
And be your position with which you place the broken member so equal according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you must make those additions return with ingenuity and in each way that you can in their places.
And be careful according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient because of your operation, causing pain or injury; and do everything in your power to apply one bone with its companion in the best way possible.
And it is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you see here any different cause, correct it and make it equal according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who cause many things to happen wrongly because of their operation, or cause the member to become contracted, as we have seen this happen because of the operation of their excessive vigilance.
And the quality of the restraint on the quiet limb is as follows: you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and largeness, and in their form.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and leg and foot, and those similar to them, it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a firm and hard wrapping, because a firm wrapping holds the large limb strongly on all sides with an equal restriction, so that in it no bruise may enter.
And then begin, just before your evacuation of excrement, to apply appropriate bandages to that place of the fracture with three or four wraps, depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then come to that part of the body above the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not slip from where you have secured the location of the fracture. And then extend yourself with another wrap on the location of the fracture, and gradually loosen the bandage slightly until you can take hold of the limb.
And then take another bandage and wrap it a second time over the broken place, and then come to the bandages below the fracture; and let your operation be in the strength of the bandage and in loosening that, as we have said above in the first wrapping.
And then place between the layers of cotton wool or cloth with which you have enveloped the irregularity of the fracture, if there is any irregularity; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage on top, and then envelop it immediately with decent-looking strips of linen, if there is no swelling or abscess in the place, and then place upon it that which draws out the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it like this for a few days; and then strengthen over it with the strips.
And let the bed's legs be of hollow cane, and well-formed with skill; or they may be of pinewood; or of palm tree trunks; and each leg's width should correspond to this form and this figure.
But it is necessary that the leg placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the other legs, and the length of the leg according to the size and smallness of the limb; and then strengthen over the legs with another bandage according to your first binding; and then bind on top with a decent bandage according to what we have said about binding, and it is that your binding should be closer to the fracture site, and the farther it is from the fracture, the tighter the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads are finer in thickness and delicacy, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people placing their threads with ropes of tortoise shell, which is a great mistake, for the binding would not be equal.
And also, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with those what you want through binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between leg and leg.
And if the patient is bitten by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in their place, then place under those a piece of wool or flannel until it does not cause harm to them.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a wound, and there is a rupture in the tendon, and I will recall that in the following chapter according to its specificity.
And know that never all the broken limb is covered with stars on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put stars on it until after five days or seven, or more, according to your certainty of avoiding pus cautiously.
And this is the manner of plasters with which the Ancients restored [limbs], which are placed on fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Method of plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many situations and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and that you take powder from a mill, and it is the fine part of the flour that adheres to the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
Based on the given text and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
This text appears to be describing another method for creating an emplaster (a type of poultice or plaster) used to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Another method of making a plaster to apply to fractures and contusions: take 10 parts of white lead, 5 parts of myrrh, 6 parts of aloe, and 20 parts of Armenian bole.
All of these should be ground in a mortar with some vinegar, then sieved and mixed with water or egg white, and applied.
Method of making a plaster for dislocated joints and bones that have left their places, and where pain occurs in those areas, as well as in cracks and fractures: take raw wool and soak it in vinegar and melted fat, then place it on the area.
However, this plaster has no virtue of restoration, but rather it cleanses pus and relieves pain.
Another method of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of a wild fig tree and the leaves of wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
A brief method of administering a plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to resolve any remaining pus: take equal parts of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran; grind them all together and mix with vinegar if the member is not broken.
But if it is scraped, then treat it with water of celery or with water and use a compress on it.
Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than the previous one, when a hard abscess occurs for the restoration of the member: take seeds of mallow and linden, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all equally divided and weighed; everything should be ground and mixed with water of willow or soft water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
But Hippocrates does not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on the broken member for its restoration, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he advises that it be mixed between thickness and thinness.
But in Gaul it has been seen that plasters are placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes of desiccation with a little heat, such as myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that you will make for injury and pain: take equal parts of honey, seeds, shorn sheep's wool or feathers of a bird, mallow, and salt; all should be ground and sieved and mixed together to make a plaster.
The sentence you provided seems to be discussing a specific medical procedure related to dislocation or splinting. Here's a line-by-line translation: If severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the area, then you should immediately cut or release it at that moment, and remove the plaster from it.
Then take a piece of cloth and a marine sponge moistened with warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with that wash the area until the swelling stops and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool saturated with vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it to the limb for a night until you are sure of cauterizing the abscess, and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat that gentle binding and small plaster, and do not make it too tight with your first constriction, and continue with it until healed.
And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and inflammation, along with all the other symptoms, have been completely relieved, and you no longer need a plaster or binding, then continue doing so as you did at the beginning.
And if nothing happens to the limb from those causes that we have mentioned, then do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days, depending on how you see the release of the limb, as we have said, so that the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
And then adjust the stricture more than in your previous stricture entirely, and adjust it according to the thickness of the patient's food, as is remembered beforehand.
But if you see the location of the fracture is already dry and withered more than is necessary, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with tepid water always when you clean it; and let this continue for three days entirely; slightly relieve the stricture, and through this operation, the nourishment will reach the limb, and it will be healed somewhat.
But what the foolish restorers of a fractured limb do another time when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear. And if this were done correctly, the Ancients would have written about it in their books and they would have acted accordingly.
And I have not seen anyone do this, which is why it is more reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter Two: Of Fractures that Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bone into the splinter, which is under the bone, just as it does in a beam; and because of this, this type is called "ascal." Or the weapon cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts off its flesh without cutting through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta.
And the injury from these two fractures is either great or small, and it can be caused by a blow with a stick or falling on a rock; the cause of this is striking with a stick or falling on a stone.
And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the skin that lies under the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury from these two fractures is either great or small.
And this type of fracture occurs within the bone, in the fineness of the small hair, and for this reason it is called a capillary fracture.
And this fracture is caused by falling or striking with a stone, which forces some layer of the bone into the broken parts inside, and it occurs in the concave place as happens to earthenware pots when they are struck and break from their entry point to the broken parts inside.
And this is most commonly found in the bones of children, such as the skulls of infants.
And for all these types of stable fractures, they are bad like stars separated from each other. And I will return with a reminder of all this in its place.
And recognize all these types of fractures by detection and investigation, testing them and removing the decaying flesh that is on them.
And a capillary type of fracture is recognized by this: it is discovered on the bone, and it is washed and anointed with oil on it, because the fracture appears black.
However, in the treatment of fractures, consider first the patient's symptoms, and if you see by the symptoms that there is a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting from anger, extension [of the limb], loss of consciousness, hoarseness of voice, fainting, high fever, discharge from the eyes and redness of them, and similar symptoms in more serious conditions, it should not be doubted that he is not cured.
And if you see non-serious symptoms, you hope for health, then you begin to treat him.
The cause is that if the patient has come to you in the early stages of the illness, as it was in the days of winter, then you should consider removing the bone before the fourteenth day according to all indications.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should consider removing the bone before the seventh day, having that which is under the bone become corrupted by flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
"And if the fracture has reached the subcutaneous tissue covering the skull and is with small fragments and attrition, then it is necessary to suture the comminuted and attritional fragment, as I will instruct you.
"And it is that you should shave the patient's head where there is a wound, and expose the bone according to your custom and skill, as best as you can based on the appearance of the wound, and be gentle with the patient.
"And if you notice the detection of bone, flows of blood or pus, then you should apply what is necessary to it, and that is to fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides and you are sure of the blood flow; and then begin with the sawing of the bone and its removal.
"And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
"And one method is that you should cut the bone with a narrow saw like this, and its shape is as follows: And then you should use another saw, slightly wider than the first; and its shape is as follows:
"And then use the widest saw of the three.
And it is necessary that you have various types of scissors, some of which are sharper than others, and some of which are shorter than the others, and they should be at the end of sharpness of their points, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in striking the scissors so that you do not cut the head and wound the patient.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to pierce around it before you administer the scissors with the pincers, which are called non-piercing pincers.
And they are not called thus only because those do not pierce the end of the bone to that which is near it, but also because the pincer has a round tip or edge on that which is below its sharp point, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these pincers, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with pointed ends, the length and width of which are according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the method for three types of trepans: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your said fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the trepan to another place, and insert it so that it passes through the entire thickness of the bone or near it.
And then you cut with scissors that which is between each crack of the bone, and make it as thin as possible over that, in order to remove the bone, either with your hand or for some other reason with certain instruments that you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And it is necessary that you take care with all caution that the scissors do not touch any part of the brain.
And once you have circled and perforated the bone, and if it is attached to the brain, and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you scrape and peel off that which is on the bone with another similar instrument, but however, it is necessary that it be thinner and more delicate than the other scissors.
This sentence seems to discuss the treatment of small bone fragments or splinters. Here's my line-by-line translation:
Here is the line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical text into English:
Based on the provided text and similarity to Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And then strike the incision of a wound with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease, as if it were turned, and be sure that no accident happens to the skin which you fear in any way. And if the patient is asleep or unconscious, certainly, even if he is the most foolish and ignorant of all men;
Then if there is any attached cause of the bone to the skin in some bony areas, cut it away with the pointed end of the knife and remove it with ease, for it will be removed without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain, then you should shave off that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to use them in the most appropriate places and the most correct ones according to where your operation leads you with that broken bone and its shape.
And you should use in your razor the sharpest of those razors to initially shave the bone, and then use the next sharpest one, continuing this process until you have used all the way up to the sharpest and finest of them.
In each of the other small fractures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what has been lost for its correction.
And it is because it cannot be applied to all who have studied in that art. This concerns what we have shown in the case of large fractures.
And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in wine and olive oil and place it over the first cloth, and press as lightly as you can on that, so as not to compress the flesh; and then apply a bandage of linen, and do not bind it tightly except according to the size of the wound alone.
Leave it with this treatment for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess has been cauterized; and then unbind it and then administer medicines which cause superfluous dryness, such as linseed and powder of violets and of saffron, and similar to those.
And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that should be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer to them all medicine of a nature that washes away and does not cause irritation.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there is no residue of ointment or anything else on it; and do not allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is pressed against the brain's membrane, it corrupts it and poisons it, and this causes a malignant evil to happen to the patient.
And it happens in the cavity of the head, when its bone is exposed and especially when its care is neglected, and it appears black on its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is harmful without any doubt.
And if blackness does not occur from the medicine placed on it, and it is due to that medicine causing blackness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with these oint a cloth, and then place that on the cavity; and then treat it with the spices of healing that are necessary until it is healed.
Chapter III
Of the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
Know that the nose is not broken unless both superior parts are fractured at the same time, or if one of them is slightly affected, because there are two bones in it; the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot be broken, so only bruising, crookedness, and narrowing occur.
However, if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert the said little finger into his nose and close that fracture inside with your index finger, and push it back outward with your thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this carefully to avoid causing more pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be straightened with the tip of a reed that has been cut to an appropriate length.
And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should do the same thing.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should give him a break from treatment for seven or ten days until the inflammation subsides.
And then insert a cloth made of linen into the tip of the nose. If the fracture is in one piece, place two splints. If the fracture is in two pieces, let it be in the larger splint of sufficient quantity to fill the nasal cavity.
And thus say some of the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in wool and changed daily, but I have not seen this. It is necessary that the cloth be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered chalk; and then leave the splint until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it is necessary to insert into the nose, instead of a splint, a needle wrapped in linen cloth; and if the patient has a severe nosebleed and is unable to breathe.
And this method is not always necessary; you can choose whether to use the needle wrapped in linen or splints.
And if an abscess forms, apply a plaster to the nose with cotton or cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if an abscess does not form, then it is necessary to apply a plaster on the outside with sesame flour and sandalwood powder mixed with egg white; and then place a linen cloth over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to cut into those areas and extract the pieces with suitable instruments; then close the incision, and treat it with water that promotes healing and solidification, and with suitable bandages.
"And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to treat that with ointments and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV
"On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
"When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not due to an injury, consider if the fracture is only on the outside and not broken into two pieces and curved inward at the breaks, then its recognition is easy.
"And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and with that, push inward the swelling of the fracture towards the breaks outside, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; with that you can evenly position it.
"And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts according to correct alignment until it is possible to join them.
"And if you encounter disruption of teeth, strengthen those which you expect to remain with wire of gold or silver or thread; and then place on the broken jaw a wax cloth, and then place on it a double-layered cloth, and place on the large cloth a star-shaped device made properly, or a sole plate equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above according to how you are skilled in binding it and as appropriate for application, so that it is not destroyed.
"And instruct the patient to rest and remain calm, and give them only thin and light food.
"And if you think that the figure has already been altered in some way, then you wait and unbind it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered from it and apply a plaster to it with powder of millstone, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place over the plaster a thin wool cloth.
And so when that plaster is attached and secured to the patient, and the position of the bone has not been altered, let it remain in place until the fracture heals and strengthens; for many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has been removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has been separated or splinters, then you should be careful to remove those splinters with an instrument suitable for the removal of such.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a fleambotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those splinters and nothing more can be taken out, if the opening of the wound is wide, close it; and if not, place one of the appropriate plasters on it and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter V
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the procedure in that case, when there is no open wound, is to have two assistants present. One should hold the splint and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that side.
And then bandage the fracture with the aforementioned things until its form is restored as needed, and there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
And if more extension is needed, then place a pillow or wool blanket under the patient's shoulder according to your necessity; extend and raise the collarbone and shorten the support with your hand until you bandage the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone towards the sides outside, because it has reached the chest, then the patient should be made to lie on their back with their neck supported, and place a medium-sized cushion on their chest muscles.
And the assistant should press on the patient's chest muscles towards the sides until the collarbone bone is raised above the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and bandage it with the aforementioned things.
If you feel splinters in your throat and they are irritating, it is necessary to cut over that area and extract those splinters easily.
And if it is lodged in the bone, then you should ingeniously make an incision with one of the incisions you have prepared for this purpose, after having placed under the throat the instrument that serves to remove [it]; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
It resembles a spoon, and this is its hollow part; and let its length be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
But let the length of it be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the rupture of the wound which you have cut when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you should join the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
And if the rupture is small or you fear an abscess forming, then you should fill the wound with cloth and poultices according to the size of the wound's cut.
And if an abscess bursts, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil mixed with honey, and place it on the affected area.
And be careful not to put the board directly on the broken bone; therefore, you should check the patient every day, and when the bandage becomes soft or you notice that the board has been lifted, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the pillow of the patient under their neck, and place a small cushion between their legs during the night; so that with this, the helper of the patient is elevated on one side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is raised by muscle elevation; or tie the arms of the patient to their neck.
And do not untie the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus in that place within twelve days.
And then renew the bandage if you see his face turning red, and adjust it in the stricture to restore that place, leaving it until the collarbone fracture is restored and coagulated.
And he should be strengthened and comforted according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes it takes longer in some men.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula is broken in the left side of him, and it is not broken in him but at the edges (margins).
And thus when it is broken in him — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into place and reduce it to its natural shape in every way possible with skill that you have.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
"However, if the spoon is concave in some places on the handle, then you fill that concavity with wax from a lion's head, and then you adjust the spoon according to its equality.
"Then you strengthen it with a human tongue, tied tightly and firmly fixed, so that it is not dislodged from its place.
"And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it is found to be softened, bind it again with another bandage, and straighten and level the spoon if it has been dislodged from its place.
"And lay the patient on his left side.
"And the spoon is restored in 20 days or in 25.
"And thus when this number is completed, then you remove the bandage, and know for certain that this pertains to the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
"And if it proceeds from the bone place, and you put a bandage underneath, then you cut over it, remove it, and act as we said in the case of the fracture of the furcula (wishbone) or aposteme (abscess) if something happens here.
"Chapter VII.
"On the healing of a broken foot.
The foot may sometimes break in its middle part and this delays healing; but the extremities of it move quickly because they are hardened and broken up.
"And its symptoms when the middle part is broken are that it inclines toward internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, rapid pulse, and vomiting blood; and this condition is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
"And its treatment is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a pillow put under their shoulders; and then press on their muscles, and adjust their ribs with two hands, and be delicate in the operation and balance according to every possible manner and what is suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as needed.
"And then place over it a plaster and bandage, and on top of that a thin wooden board made of willow or hazel, or similar light material; after wrapping it in cloth; and then be delicate in tying this to the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and go around it with bandages according to the roundness of the back several times, and secure it with a decent tie; and then pay attention to the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes the removal of that corrupt or purulent matter, or pain, or abscess that occurs in that place, then you should cut and clean it, remove the plaster, and treat what happens with appropriate care; and then return the plaster, if it fits the surface; and apply a tight bandage until it is healed.
Chapter 8.
Regarding the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large areas such as the back; and at their ends, on the front side, contusions do not occur there unless they are cartilaginous. And his condition is not hidden from feeling by the investigation of him with these words.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it encloses the fracture with these things according to the possible manner, until it is healed as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with steel, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside parts, then it causes the patient severe pain and puncturing, like the puncture that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, because the bones penetrate the membrane; and it causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And already the Ancients have described it with ingenious words.
And of these things they said: it is necessary to place foods on the patient that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach may swell and stretch, and the break may be pushed outwards towards the parts outside.
However, we should be careful with this, lest it causes the formation of a hard abscess, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, then it will already help with that.
And some of them said that it should be placed on the stomach and then sucked with force; and this seems reasonable, but nevertheless it is feared that the suction will draw the impurities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the place with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage may be equal when wrapped around according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a diet of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe pain that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the skin with a tooth-like point, fear for the patient arises. In this case, it is necessary to make an incision over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then place on it the instrument which preserves the hollow [or cavity], the description of which has been given above; and by this means the bone will be more easily extracted.
And now, we adjust the two lips of the wound. If it is large, use stitching, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, then cut it open and pour powdered oil into the wound, place a dressing over it, and let the patient be treated with water that is appropriate for the internal abscess.
And have him lie on his back on the side where he usually sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of a fracture in the spine, the back, and the neck.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and later it affects their joints, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will heal or not, consider this: If his hands are already softened, numbed, paralyzed, and cannot move them nor stretch or strengthen them, and when you squeeze those hands with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he feels no pain, then you should know that he is not healing, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
And if he moves them and feels constriction with the fingers and needle, then you should know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will heal with care.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck looking like this and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the patient's feet.
Then if you see that they are already swollen, do to them what is done on the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he will have difficulty breathing and defecating without his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Know then that it is fatal, and therefore do not work on his cure.
But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And his cure is that you make a hole for the discharge of the pus and place over the affected vertebra olive oil mixed with sun alone, or with mugwort; place it there several times a day until the pus is drained.
Then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and order the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the side where he finds pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the fracture of the small bone or any other cause is separated from him, then it is necessary to dry on the cord and take out that bone; and then join the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some healing ointment until it heals.
Based on the given context and the pattern of translation from the similar text, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
If you feel broken shards within them, then pierce through that area and remove the fragments, and heal the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capital Ten
On the restoration of the soul.
The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they break, the fracture is only in the extremities of those bones and extends along their length; they also move apart within. When this happens to a patient, there is pain in that area and a puncture, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.  The text appears to be discussing symptoms of ankle fractures.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture which is its shape.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you enclose that according to what appears suitable by equal enclosure until it resembles its natural shape.
However, if the fracture is in the length where it has already moved apart, then you make the patient lie on their back until you are ready to restore that fracture. And then when you have enclosed that, place a plaster on it, and then place a splint of wood or rope over it, and bind tightly so that you do not fear a break in the fracture or displacement of the splint.
And fill the cavity with water so that it reaches the stricture equally, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if a cold abscess appears, then cease from extending and restoring it until the cold abscess is settled. Place water over it so that it settles as previously described; then return to restoring it, and strengthen it as needed.
And if this occurs in the shinbones or they are broken, then treat them.
Chapter XI
On restoring a break in the thighbone.
The thighbone is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a flat stick, medium-sized, like this:
And let there be two strings attached to its ends, and then suspend it from a high place.
Then let the patient sit on a chair, and then throw out their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint of the stick's curve, where the bent part is attached.
Based on the given translation pattern and context, let's break down the sentence line by line:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
If you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the break with one bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should extend their respective parts.
So if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then half of the bandage should be placed over the heel and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that location and over the elbow as well.
Apply that with ease and without difficulty, and when it is applied as needed, and properly secured by good application, then strengthen that if an abscess does not form.
But if an abscess does form, then leave the constriction in place for seven days, and place wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then you may strengthen that.
And the way to strengthen that is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap it with a linen bandage; and then attach the arm to the support, and place your open hand over the affected muscle.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then use of needles.
And place on the fracture that needle which is more fine and stronger than the other needles; and place between each needle the width of a finger, and let the length of the needles be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then strengthen the needles with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And make sure that your binding on the place of the fracture is tighter. And the longer the fracture, the less binding should be used.
And thus, if you see the arrangement of the needles and the binding in this way as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper place, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the binding and needles in place for seven days as we have said.
And also consider the bandage in all directions for three days, so that swelling or inflammation does not occur in the place; or it is prohibited that food reaches the limb by the disposition of excess tightness; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be upon their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place a thick cushion full of wool on it [the broken limb], and be mindful at all hours of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not distorted or dissolved, nor is the bandage softened; therefore, correct this with all your skill.
And place the patient's food according to the order that we have given previously, so that the food is light at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food of the patient heavier.
Because it is customary for the adjutor and the thigh to be strengthened in forty days; therefore, they should be loosened, and a bath should be administered, and it should be treated with ointments that rectify this.
And if the fracture is close to being healed, then you should not loosen from that limb and the bandages until after fifteen days or two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of these is small, and it is called the thumb, and the other is large and is placed under the thumb, closer to the bottom.
And if only the large or small fire is broken quickly and they are both extinguished together.
And when the small fire is broken on top, its restoration is swift, and its healing is even swifter.
And when the fire within him breaks below, his fracture is bad, and his healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the small fire above, it is suitable for the doctor to use a small extension with ease until that one is enclosed.
But if it is the large fire that has been extinguished, then a more vigorous extension should be used.
And if both fires are extinguished together, then you must use the strongest extraction.
And it is necessary that you place the hand figure for restoration and extend its extension on a cushion, and the palm of the hand should be on the sides above, as well as all the others, and let the auricular be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
And place a cushion in front of them on the bed or chest, so that the patient does not encounter labor.
And next, the minister should extend the arm of the affected side with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister should do the same above.
And then the doctor should wrap the bones until they are reduced in the best possible form.
And if there is a fracture of the bone, then you should perforate all the flesh in its place with your virtue.
And if it appears that the fracture is separated so that it touches the tendons and you do not hope for its recovery, then you cut over it and remove that [piece] according to the manner we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a special chapter about it, so take care of that [wound] first.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you should line a cloth with a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which is halfway between fineness and strength, and wrap a tight, fine bandage over it until the abscess has subsided; then remove the plaster and place a prepared poultice of flour and egg white on it, and then place scales; and let the scale that is placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then you place your pressure on the site of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when the pressure is closer to the top part of the fracture or the lower part of it, apply a little more moisture according to what was mentioned earlier in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the bandage with which it is held together should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And observe the limb and the bandage closely for several days. And if any cause occurs which requires correction, such as swelling that affects the limb, and then it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the limb uncovered until it rests, and then apply the pressure again.
And if the pressure has softened and the bone has moved and appears as it should, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of pressure, for then it is necessary to soften that (pressure) a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment reaches there, and then strengthen it again.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes we mentioned, then it is unnecessary to release him within approximately 20 days or around that time frame.
And the patient's hand should be suspended by its ability to make agitated movements, and let them sleep on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or if it is a simple fracture, it is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the injury and the strength of the patient.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of finger fractures of the hand and toes.
Know that in the fingers of the hand and in the tips of the toes, it is common for there to be a slight fracture, and this does not happen unless there are many bruises visible.
And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruise, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side and in front of them place a board equal to the length of the arm, and then place the hand on that board extended.
And then the assistant should straighten the broken bones and the doctor should bandage them until they are well set in a good cast.
And then it is necessary to place a plaster and some padding, unless an abscess forms; then place a plate on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
But if the cramp is in the inner parts, you should turn the palm of your hand outward, and then make something similar to a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their cramped hand; immediately wrap it with a long cloth.
And place a leather plate covered in cloth beneath it, so that the plate is pressed against the palm; and hold that as needed.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then it is necessary to place a plate on top and another plate beneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and immediately place the splints as the hand is wrapped with bandages between them.
And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers of the hand, then if it is the thumb, bandage it as needed and immediately bind it to the palm, and if you want, place a small straight plate under it so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And consider, in your treatment, and then that, the disposition of abscesses cautiously and opposed — with your action — to what is needed when any cause occurs from those, according to how the story is retold of it.
Chapter XIV
On the treatment of fractures in the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when it is observed closely, is broken and is felt according to its conversion to the front part and the uppermost part.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and face.
And then the minister extends all the bandage to its full length according to the quality of it when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is near the top of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the knee towards the end of the shinbone, so that its extension can reach up there, and another bandage under the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be close to the knee, and its extension should be towards the lower parts.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence: But if an abscess occurs in the patient, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess subsides by itself, and afterwards return to your treatment.
The stricture of the patient should be done in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, folding it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip bone.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the thigh near the bone at the partition below, and let the ends of the thread protrude from the higher part of the two parts, and then revolve around the thigh and hip whatever excess there is from the bandage.
And then place on the hip in the location of that fracture thorns, and place one of those thorns over the bone of the thigh.
And then fill the spaces between the thigh and the hip with soft cloths, so that the stricture may be made firm.
And then begin with a strong bind in the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four windings, and as you move further away from the place of the fracture, let your binding be less and lighter and moister.
Sure, let's translate the given sentence:
And then release the pressure on that part, so that no corrosion or apostema occurs in the member, nor swelling and similar things; and if any of these causes occur, then consider yourself with caution about it, and rectify what happens immediately according to what we have said many times before.
But if the bone is affected by the ulcer that is formed, then it is necessary for you to remove that part as much as possible; and if not, make an incision on it and clean it, and treat it with what preceded the memory until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh or other bones is adjusted with splints, as we have said in the case of the shoulder and the arm.
But nevertheless, in the restoration of it done in such a way, no limping occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or something is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary for the one on which it always stands to limp.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
It seems like you provided only the chapter number "Capitol .xv." without any accompanying text. If you can provide the full content of this chapter or a specific line from it, I would be happy to help with the translation into English!
It appears that there is no provided text following "De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh." If you can provide the full sentence or paragraph, I'll be glad to assist with its translation into English.
Here is the line-by-line translation:
If the patient has a fracture, it is only a crack or break in their parts, whether with injury or without, and everything is dependent on their sensation.
And the restoration of the patient is such that what is broken from their parts is enclosed with the aforementioned until it is united and joined as much as possible by equality, facility, and construction.
Then place a plaster and place it on that round steel if you need it; and strengthen it with a bandage as is appropriate.
Then consider all the precautions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as preventing inflammation and similar issues, so that you can avoid any accident and provide what is suitable for the patient until they are healed.
Chapter XVI
On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the tibia.
And whatever species of fracture occurs to either of these two bones, the restoration of them is done in the same way as for the arm, and the operation for them is one.
And if two bones are fractured simultaneously, the leg becomes disjointed in all its parts.
And if a more subtle bone is broken, the leg becomes disjointed before [or: in front of] the parts.
And if a thicker bone is broken, you find it behind [or: after], and this is one of the causes that are not familiar to you.
Then immediately administer extension, traction, and ligament bonding according to [or: in proportion with] the same principle.
However, it is necessary that if the leg fracture has many fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you can help with your skill.
And in the case of leg operations, similar to arm operations, when you align the splints and complete the entire operation, then take splints of pine wood which are placed beneath the causes [or: reasons] that are placed on the soles [or: feet], and these are made from palm branches; choose those with a small thickness, not too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and inserted from the ankle downwards.
Then wrap each splint in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the broken part of the leg from one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should go from the ankle downwards to the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two ropes in three places on both ends and the middle, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stays in good position.
And then a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on it so that it maintains its immobility.
And it is particularly important that you do this in cases of a fracture, and when there is severe pain.
And then examine the leg every day and study it for any changes, and guard against abscesses or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occurs, then stay with him using what is necessary until he is healed.
Chapter XVII
About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not always fracture completely; rather, some of the bones in the foot may fracture at times; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they are only affected by dislocation in most cases.
And if the bones of the foot appear to be fractured and sometimes these bones are raised above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as they would walk.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's the line-by-line translation:
And then strengthen that with the foot in a stretched-out position, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other necessary materials.
And after three or four days have passed, then you unbind the bandages, for you will find the bones swollen, or bruised, or dislocated, and the treatment for these is as follows:
But if any are bruised, then restore them, and wrap them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place on the bruised finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; then lay the foot on this board that I have recommended to you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
But if what is bruised of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the sole of the foot, and let it stand with one end of the board under the belly of the foot so that it holds firmly.
And it is important for you to remember not to overlook any of the causes that I have mentioned to you in other cases of accidents, and be prepared for every eventuality with what is necessary.
**Capítulo dieciocho.**
Sobre las fracturas en el hueso de la cadera y el fémur, así como en el pene y el escroto del hombre.
Cuando el hueso de la cadera de una mujer está fracturado, entonces colóquenla en una postura caída, y después inclínela hacia la parte inferior del torso un poco, y sosténla desde atrás.
Luego, la matrona debe llenar el hueso con algodón, y se debe hacer lo mismo en los otros huesos; y luego se debe sacudir a la mujer, y elevar suavemente sus piernas un poco, porque todo esto debe olvidarse hasta que el hueso esté frente a la parte del hueso como se espera y el hueso roto regrese.
Luego coloque vendajes sobre sus piernas, y cuando desee orinar, retire el algodón con facilidad y luego orine; luego coloque nuevamente el algodón y regrese según la misma manera en que lo hizo al principio, y luego regrese a su primer vendaje. ierno.
Y haga esto durante siete días o hasta que se recupere, porque el hueso está restaurado.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and place on its opening a reed cannula; insert the entire bladder into the patient's wound, and then blow through the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
And it should be filled with cotton and left there for several days, as we have been advised, until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and setting that which has been advised for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these common fractures and which happen rarely, especially to those who have some learning and experience and understand my words; for that fracture shows you the major ways of the proper method in restoration and setting it, and so understand well.
But when the man's penis is broken, take an eggshell, and put the penis into it; then place over it a wrapper of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it lie for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
It seems that "Capitulo .xix." is meant to indicate "Chapter XIX". This would be a heading or title for the section of the text rather than a complete sentence with meaning to translate.
Here's my translation:
The sentence suggests that in cases of bone fracture with injury, it is particularly important if the bone is large like the hip or thigh bone, to quickly cauterize and perform phlebotomy if the conditions for phlebotomy are suitable as mentioned before.
And if the wound is bleeding, then you should apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and sprinkle powdered white lead on it, unless there is another cause at hand.
And then begin to set the bone immediately that day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the setting of the bone until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided. Do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause bad accidents to happen.
But if the broken bone is protruding over the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and make it even with your hands, with ease and with little force.
But if the reduction is not possible with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the doctor takes three or four of these according to what is needed for all kinds of fractures in every kind of treatment.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
"And if it is an acute condition with swelling at the ends of its extremities; and if there is thickening above it, and from the middle of it to the parts that are divided.
And this is its form.
"And it is named in Greek 'voluntary hernia,' and it is a small palette.
"Therefore, the affected acute extremity should be placed higher than the prominent bone's extremity.
And you push it once until the bone returns, and it is equalized with some glue.
And therefore, you should strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary that you insert the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments that we have named; or saw it with one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
And then scrape away what remains on the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone has been returned to its place, and immediately after the reduction the patient experiences very intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do this, so that you may provide great relief to the patient.
After you have completed the bone's restoration, then immerse a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place any cerate or other oily substance on the wound, so that rot and corruption will not occur in it.
And immediately administer steel (magnesium sulfate) at the time of completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can scrape it with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused either death or severe harm to their patients, which is madness. And if there is a slight swelling, make it soft, different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that evil accidents which we have mentioned may happen to it, and there is pain in the place, then do not put steel (magnesium sulfate) on it, but make a dressing of hard cloths instead of steel, and bind it with them.
And when the wound has begun to heal, with a brace placed on it for one or two days, then you remove the cloth that was placed over it with vinegar, and proceed to administer calves' foot jelly, which by our custom is used to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ointments.
And ensure that you release the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and consolidated, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction flows away from it towards the lower parts with ease.
If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor separated from the brace, then know that there are stones in the small intestine, for it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. And from those stones, those which are separated should be removed and extracted. Those which cannot be separated and cause the limb to swell and pain, you must try to cut them out as best as possible.
And if pus or ichor comes out of the wound, which indicates that it is suppurating or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should place on each one of them water that suits it for the cure of which the previous narrative has already been made in its chapter.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
It seems like you have provided the chapter or section number "Capitol .xx." without any text following it. To provide a line-by-line translation into English, I would need the actual content of that chapter or section in the language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Please provide the specific text you'd like me to translate.
Let's break down the sentence into its components and then translate it line by line:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
The provided medieval medical text appears to be instructing on the treatment of swelling or inflammation. Here is a line-by-line translation:
And leave the bandage on without removing it for a few days; then remove it and replace it with another until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen that lead plate, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is tight, and it's necessary to remove it immediately, then cut through it at its highest part, and cut away the excess and protruding parts, or shave it with a razor until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI
Chapter XXI: On the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and then keep the limb gentle and immobile according to its nature.
When a bone fracture has been restored, and then the limb is kept gentle and immobile, this occurs only for several reasons: one of which is too much loosening or tightening of the bandages, preventing the nutrients from reaching the limb; or excessive wrapping; or excessive movement at the wrong time; or insufficient blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make his heart tender until his blood increases in him; and administer a bath; and bring joy and happiness to him.
And then place the plaster on the member, so that the plaster attracts the corrupting substance, or continue to keep it moist with tepid water, until the substance runs and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
About the treatment of broken bones, when they are crookedly restored and the operation is forbidden for this reason:
When the restored member approaches healing from crookedness and protrusion of the broken bone and knot, and this is due to the form of the member, nevertheless, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, it does not matter if you receive the word of someone who thinks that member was recently broken.
However, there have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be soaked in tepid water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as leaves of plantain and root of comfrey, melilot, and similar; and let there be made for him a plaster with a mollifying plaster such as diachylon well made; or let it be taken mucilage of root of comfrey and ground with egg white or with oil of almonds, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be taken and crushed with chicken feces, and similar to those of the medicines which are named amermans consolidacio.
And sometimes it is resolved with persistent gentle rubbing using the moistest hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is strong and turned into stone, and surgical intervention is required, then it is necessary for the pus to be brought out from above and the continuity of the bone to be dissolved. The excess material should be removed with a sharp instrument, and ease should be given to that part by applying diligent effort and study.
Chapter XXIII
On speech and dislocation
Dislocation is the dislocation of some of the joints from their proper place, preventing movement, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing the patient great pain and harm.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint will become swollen and hard with water, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not necessary to massage or stretch during the swelling phase, because excessive movement causes spasms and intense pain.
Certainly! Let's break down and translate the sentence line by line:
And every member should be treated with the remedy that is associated with it in its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as preceded in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated, and if not delayed; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a slight movement and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, so that they are softened at the joint to the point where saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its skin.
However, when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place with little intervention.
However, if the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to administer a slight reduction promptly, without delaying at all.
And the attendant should hold the patient's head, while the physician introduces his two thumbs of one hand into the patient's mouth and presses against the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides. The other fingers should be outside, gripping the patient's hands. And he should tell the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go wherever they want. And the physician should guide the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction of the patient is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer steam with hot water and oil until both are slightly reduced, without delaying the complete reduction as we have said.
And when they return and are swallowed, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place those powdered cloths with wax over it, made of wax and olive oil; and then bind it gently with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be supported between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; when they are able, let their food be softened until the pains subside and the jaws are healed, then let them eat whatever they want.
And this should be administered gently, and do not work on opening the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some point and have not returned to their places, then apply cold compresses and give frequent drinks of cold water, and cause the patient's stomach to be emptied quickly, and cause them to vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times the one on whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter 25
On reducing the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the shoulder bone.
The collarbone is not dislocated from within the chest because of its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside part, and this is clear from touch.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then press the area with your palm strongly, because it will return (to its proper place).
Then place a poultice and powder on that spot and strengthen it.
However, the end of that which is the elbow and is connected with it (the collarbone) is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what you find appropriate.
Then place a poultice, and powder, and compress, and instruct the patient to rest and take repose until healed.
And with this same treatment, the end of the shoulder bone is reduced when it is separated from its place. >/i>
**Capítulo 26.**
Sobre la reducción de la dislocación del músculo.
Sabes que el músculo no se disloca sino en tres maneras. La primera manera es cuando está dislocado desde la cabeza del hueso hasta la parte de los dedos.
La segunda manera es cuando está dislocado en la parte superior del músculo, lo cual es raro; y no se disloca hacia atrás por el hombro; ni tampoco hacia adelante por los nervios.
Y generalmente se disloca y sale por la parte de los dedos hacia la cabeza del hueso, lo cual ocurre principalmente en aquellos individuos con poca carne; en tales casos, es fácil de dislocar. Pero en aquellos con mucha carne, es difícil de sacar. IENTENDIDO
Y a veces sucede en algunos hombres por golpes o caídas, y el músculo del paciente se llena de pus, y se cree que ya está dislocado debido a eso.
Por lo tanto, debes probarlo mientras aún estás junto al paciente, y luego procede con su curación.
Here's the translation of your source sentence:
If it is dislocated in the feet or ankles, and you then find clear swelling that is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, a slight reduction can be made when it is recent and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the attendant raises the patient's hand to the affected area; and then places his fingers underneath the toe, and lifts the joint with force back into its place, and the attendant raises the patient's hand, and extends it upward; and then places it downward because it returns slightly.
But if by that which we have said it does not return, and from the beginning when the dislocation occurred several days have passed, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water and administered a poultice that softens and relaxes, such as cucumber juice, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and a wool pad of moderate thickness should be placed under their toe. The physician should place his heel on the pad and lift the top of the toe with all his strength, and pull the patient's hand so that it is not moved away from underneath. Another attendant should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved away from underneath, because this will soon return to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that is for you to have present a man who is taller than the patient, and he should stand on the side of that limb, and insert his muscle beneath the armpit of the patient and raise the armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand away from their abdomen. If the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended with him, so that he becomes heavier, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And he is reduced in another way: that is, a long pole is placed on the ground with a rounded head, similar to a pestle, not too thick or thin, and then the patient is placed below it; after which sheets are placed over the head of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended on one side of the other part; and his body is stretched on the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: that you take a pole whose length is two spans and its width four fingers, and its thickness decreases towards the top like this:
And then place round sheets over the head of the pole so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
Then place the patient under the tilt of the pole, and extend their hand or arm over the pole within the middle section, and bind the pole over the shoulders, arms, and the extremity of the hand.
The text appears to be discussing the treatment of joint pain, specifically when it affects the feet. Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary that the patient's food be minimal until the limb is soothed, because this facilitates his healing.
And the food should be given in larger quantities around seven or five times, and exercise should be performed; and if it is not stopped and softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another reason, then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be administered in that area, as was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced onto it several times, and it is not fixed and caught, and he cannot lift that arm to its original position, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its place.
For the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankles or in the back of the legs, the reduction is done with traction and extension by hand, until it returns.
And let the other constriction be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if there is an accidental healing delay in the limb and tardiness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and the limb returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the shoulder joint is difficult to dislocate and likewise returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly forward or backward. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you because it causes a visible deformity or changes the feeling of the area according to how it was dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the socket, this becomes clearly apparent, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can the muscle reach it.
It is fitting to cut [the skin], and to reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before the swelling comes, for if it comes with the swelling, its reduction becomes difficult, and it is hardly healed completely; especially when it is in the backward direction, because this is the worst of all species of dislocations, and the most painful, and many people have died from it.
Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence:
But if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it so that you bend the hand with its own hand, until you feel the elbow with the palm of your hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and great force.
And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it in this way with both hands so that it does not rise up against the extension.
And then the arm should be turned in all directions, because it is wrapped with a long-folded cloth over the hand of the patient, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps to facilitate the lubrication of the joint; and then press the joint strongly until it returns.
And then the reduction of it requires that it be placed on a poultice in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be bound tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then it should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should remove the bandage from him and leave it thus.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you should renew the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it becomes stronger; and after that, remove it.
But if a gravity (heaviness) occurs around the reduction of the joint, and the patient's condition is in motion, then administer a bath and subtle friction, along with compression, until it is relieved; or place on the joint something weighty, like a heavy cushion; and then bind it, leaving it on the bones day and night. And then remove that (weight), and put him in a bath; and when he comes out, then rub the joint with warm friction, and then place on it again something weighty, like a round stone, once, and the second time, and the third time within a bath, until it is healed.
And if you wish, place on it a piece of cow skin that has been moistened and scraped with a knife, and bind it tightly around that; and do this several times, because that (the joint) is moistened and returns to its condition.
Chapter 28.
"About the treatment of joint dislocation in a patient, it concerns the joint between the arm and the hand.
"Sometimes the hand of a patient is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important that the reduction be done quickly in the hour when the dislocation occurs, before the site becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
"The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having an assistant extend the patient's hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
"However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already turned towards the back of the hand. If this is the case, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation is preceding towards the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that prominence of the joint.
"And therefore if it returns quickly, that's good; but if not, strengthen it with a compress to reduce the swelling and leave it; do not attempt this again, for otherwise, neither the patient nor you can bear the reduction of the pus after the first day has passed.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Here's my best guess at translating the given text into English:
Certainly! Let's translate the sentence into English line by line:
Capitulo XXIX.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the back of the palm or at its base, then straighten the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then support the tip of the finger and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
Then suspend it and stretch it until it is straightened in its own day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that description, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and bind it to that place and do with it the first operation until it is healed.
Do the same in other places where it is dislocated.
Chapter XXX
Of the treatment of dislocation of the spine of the back.
When there is complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae in the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death comes to the patient. ️
And the sign of this is that the patient's discharge occurs involuntarily and cannot be controlled; and often some members of him are weakened, or both legs, or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra has been displaced from its place, because often it happens that one is displaced and sometimes the removal of those to four divisions is done.
Therefore, when it is lifted towards the posterior parts and is called jaundice.
But the cure for it is to consider if jaundice occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure and no complete healing from it.
But the ancients have spoken about the causes and treatments of jaundice occurring in adulthood or from similar conditions with many words, from which the greatest benefit is derived; but I have abbreviated it so that only the essentials are retained, due to my own closeness to the subject matter. With this, I have presented and formulated it using various instruments, through which I will demonstrate and explain it.
And of these, only that which occurs in the back is cured with what I will relate.
And it is that the patient should be placed on his back with a pillow under his head near the wall, and that a moist instrument should be placed underneath him to prevent his feet from being lifted.  \\ (Note: "esturment" can also mean "tool" or "instrument", but in this context, it likely refers to something like a cushion or blanket.)
It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving the use of poles or rods to immobilize or support a patient. Let's break it down:
Sure, I'd be happy to help with that translation! Here it goes line by line:
Certainly! Let's break down the text line by line:
And then each assistant should extend the bandage to the base of the thigh, and ensure that the two thighs and their corresponding bandages are not moved from their places in which they are fixed. However, they should not be secured too tightly as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms firmly on the spine until it returns, or he can place them on a table, and then he should position his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return with this method, then take a table whose length or width is approximately three arms' lengths, and make an opening in the wall where we said the patient is close to, so that the end of the table can fit through it. And then place half of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end of the table, and presses firmly until the spine is shortened and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open the turn that is wrapped around the hand; and it is that you place under the patient's head two stakes at the end of the fist, each of which should be one arm in length, and place the patient's head at the end of two stakes likewise; and let there be a palm's width between each stake. And already in each stake make an opening through which the turn can pass, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
And place a round stick in which is the tourniquet, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole in which the stick is made, and its length is one hand's breadth with what is wrapped around; and in the two other sticks there is something similar to that.
And then tighten the bands that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole that is nearest to their head, and the bands that you have tied around their thighs in the tourniquet that is nearest to their feet.
And then there should be a servant at each tourniquet to twist it with their hand, and the doctor should remove the spine as we have said.
And after the spine has been removed and the place cleaned, then you should put a dry plaster with egg white, and then cotton; and then place on the plaster a piece of wood, whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length is such that it covers the place of the ulcer, and over the part where the spine was.  (Note: The word "gelbositat" seems to be related to "gibbus," which means a hump or swelling on the back.)
And then bind the patient with the bandages we mentioned earlier, and feed them with fine food until they are healed.
And if there remains any trace in the area after healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with the use of a poultice for an extended period, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been applied to that area.
Sometimes it happens that there is an issue at the end of the spine of the back, and it is believed to be caused by that dislocation; and that bone is very delicate, so one should not attempt to move it with this medicine, because it could cause death.
Chapter 31
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should only be treated for dislocation, and not as with other joints, which can be treated with minor displacement or concavity.
The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: either it is displaced internally, or externally, or anteriorly, or posteriorly.
It is most commonly dislocated internally, and less commonly anteriorly or posteriorly.
And the sign of the dislocation in the patient's teeth is that, when you align the patient's healthy leg with the patient, it is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, which is where the pus has collected from the pus-filled abscess, because the head of the bone has already arrived here.
The sign of that in which a dislocation occurs is outside the joints, because its occurrences are opposite to this occurrence.
And the sign of that in which a dislocation occurs in the front joints is that it extends its leg according to its custom, but nevertheless it cannot bend it without pain, and if it insists on going it cannot proceed forward; and the patient's urine is retained and their groin is swollen, and they walk on the heel.
And the sign of that in which a dislocation occurs in the back joints is that it cannot extend the foot or bend it forward as it usually does, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the groin is swollen, and the head of the bone is at that place.
Here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence:
In that case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocations, you should turn the joint so that it extends inward towards the partitions and outward towards the partitions, and move it to the right and left, because it returns easily and does not require another treatment.
This text seems to describe a medical procedure for dealing with a hernia or intestinal issue. Here's a line-by-line translation:
This line appears to be describing an extension or stretching of the patient's body or a particular part of it. Let's break it down:
And let the extension of all these be in one moment, until the patient is raised with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension applies to all four (limbs).
And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then every type of treatment that I will say about the proper cure is necessary.
In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on their left side; and then place the liament (bandages) over the back of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the place below the groin; and then extend the liament above the groin to the highest part of the fork (pubic bone).
And then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient and press firmly on the thick part of the dislocated thigh and extend it outward with great force, because that returns to its place.
And this type is of easier treatment for reducing this member than other types.
But if it is resistant and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure completely, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together tightly, lightly, over both heels and both ankles.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four times, and let the afflicted leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two times.
And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, with their head higher; and let the length of them from the ground be the quantity of two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong young man to push the head of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man pushes the cushion strongly with vigor, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation that has come out, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have described when they have been gelbozated; and let the bandage be strengthened specifically on the afflicted leg and on their feet.
And then two posts should be placed, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjusted posts should be placed in the middle of the bed, on which wet cloths should be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the post is between their thighs, because you want the extension to the parts below to not be pulled.  />
And immediately each assistant extends to their designated area, while the physician with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary for the thigh to be slightly extended, and it should be according to this same account on the heel; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the patient's ankle, and then presses that with the other hand, and with that pressure extends [the leg] back to the lower part behind the shin.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended backward, but rather raised off the ground; it is also necessary for him to be placed on a hard surface, as we mentioned earlier if his ankle is dislocated outward, according to what we said about placing him on two ankles; and let his face be down and the bandages extended, as we have said.
And it is necessary to apply pressure with a board over the area where the joint is located.
Therefore, once the reduction is completed as necessary — and you see the sign of reduction in the patient, which should not be hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient's legs and see those swellings and the patient extends their leg and expands it without hesitation, then know that the limb has been returned to its proper position — at this point, place two cushions and apply a poultice, and wrap with a bandage so that the width is not excessive in any part; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those swellings disappear, know that the dislocation has been set, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, then return and apply a poultice to it, and extend that according to your first method, and leave it for three days.
Then remove the poultice, and make the patient walk on both legs for some days, until it is comfortable.
**Capítulo 32.**
**Sobre el tratamiento de la luxación de la articulación del hombro.**
El hombro puede luxarse de tres maneras: hacia afuera, hacia adentro, más hacia abajo que hacia atrás; pero no puede luxarse hacia delante.
El signo de la luxación es que, cuando ordenes al paciente que aplique su pierna contra el costado, sabrás que el hombro está luxado.
La restauración de todas estas formas es que hagas que el paciente se siente derecho, extendiendo su pierna si puede; adhieres tus dedos a la cara del paciente y pones su pie entre tus pies; luego haces que tu hombro se adhiera al de él con tus palmas, y mantén esas entre tus manos sobre el hombro del paciente con fuerza, mientras otro ayudante extiende su pie hasta que el hombro vuelva a su lugar.
El signo de que ha sido reducida es que su pierna se adhiera al costado con ligereza y sin esfuerzo.
Luego vendaja eso y haz que la pierna se adhiera al costado, y luego lía ambos juntos con un vendaje durante tres o cuatro días, y luego retira el vendaje.
And do not let the patient walk for some days until he is healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of him to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with bandages such as those described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII
On the Treatment of Talus Dislocation.
The talus may sometimes be displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the direction, and its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will see the swelling of the talus proceeding in the direction to which it has been dislocated.
But the treatment of its reduction is easy, and it should be extended gently with the hands and bandaged until it returns to its place.
However, in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its course, you should make the patient lie on his back, and let him have a strong and vigorous attendant behind his back in the middle part of him.
And then you take with your right hand the foot from the superior part, and with your left hand below the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then two times with the left, and then extend with the left; and push the sole of the foot with your right hand behind the thigh without effort.
And do this twice as we have agreed.
And then push the sole of the foot to the thigh for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore, if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, because that will return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him in this way that we have described, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and tie a sturdy rope around a wooden post that is firmly planted in the ground, and place it between his thighs, and you have already wrapped the cloth around him so that he does not slip.
And then the servant holding his thighs should stretch the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies over the instep of the foot; and then each servant stretches against the extension of their counterpart, and the rope should be stretched between the patient's thighs holding it, so that his body is not pulled towards the sides beyond its extension.
And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy part at the ends, because the dislocation returns more easily.
And therefore, once the dislocation has returned and it is clear to you that the reduction was successful, then place a poultice on it and bandage it tightly, and bind the foot with a bandage to the thigh.
And be careful or avoid damaging the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not press on them strongly.
And then let it be for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and become corrupt again, and thus it will not receive healing.
And if an abscess forms, then you should administer to the patient that which was previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place for treatment and application, until it has been removed.
Chapter 34
Of the treatment for dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is advisable that the dislocated person be stretched with little effort without difficulty, which is quite easy.
However, if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then you should have the patient sit on a hard surface like the ground or a table, and be positioned as if they were standing.
Then you should stand on the foot of the patient, placing your own foot over what is protruding from the joints, and then step firmly with your foot until it returns to its original position, and you see that it has been straightened without any bulge appearing.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot that supports the entire foot, which has two handles, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm bandage for three days; then remove it and have him rest from walking for many days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Chapter 35
Of the kinds of dislocation that are caused with a blow, or a fracture, or both at the same time.
When any of these causes occur and you try to treat it and restore the patient, many times death occurs.
And it is not necessary that the one who assumes the care of him be presumptuous, but rather he should be wise in the art, experienced over a long period, merciful and compassionate, patient, not reckless or presumptuous; and he should use at the beginning of the treatment only those medicines that cautiously draw out pustules, leaving the patient to divine judgment, except for him whom you hope will be saved from perdition, with relief from illness, in which some hope appears. And then you should immediately work to achieve his reduction at the beginning of the cause, before a cautious pustule forms.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regime that cautiously draws out pustules and treats the wound with appropriate drying ointments.
And if there is dislocation with fracture and the stagia bones are separated, then you should bore through their substance, and do as we have said in the case of simple illnesses that were mentioned earlier, regarding those places.
And beware and avoid according to your ability that which is harmful in the paths of fear, as I have previously warned you; for this is better for you and more lasting for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time. Amen. Thus ends the words of Avicenna, may God bless him. Amen.
