So, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, by its completion one reaches its end, and through its explanations and descriptions, it has become clear to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, thus it is surgery.
For the operation by hand has been neglected in our region and in our time, to such an extent that it is almost entirely lost, and its traces have disappeared; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed greatly and have come to errors and confusion, until their meanings are closed off and the power and art of them are weakened.
And it has seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and description and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as will be added by the explanation, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its practitioner to be well-exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the arrangement of the members and their forms, their connections and separations; and he must have knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their function; and of the pulsating veins and the still ones, and their exit points.
And for this reason Ipocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in action it is little, and mostly in the art of the hand.
But we have already said that about him in the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable in what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid making errors which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen many times. For some are educated in this science and yet cast it aside without knowledge or experimentation.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incise a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed until the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man whose condition had worsened, and the stone was large, and he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day that man died.
And I had been called to remove it, and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received payment of one thousand ducats from our land for surgery, and he came across a black eunuch who had a broken leg; the doctor, in his ignorance, removed the fracture from the wound using cushions and splints with great strength, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he released him according to his desires, and then bound him up again, and then left him alone for some days and ordered us to release the bandages; and it was so bad that the thigh and the foot were both infected, and it came to a fatal end.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bandages, and after some time, he gained peace and his pains subsided.
However, the corruption had already taken hold in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread in the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, to the point that the evil of it spread throughout his body.
The reason for this is that the cancerous abscess is full of melancholic humors, so it is not necessary to pierce it completely with iron, but rather it should be done in a member that can bear it, and then let it be drained.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two paths: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work associated with great danger in its conditions.
And I have already written about this in all parts of this book where there is an operation that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it aside, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
And therefore, take up your arms with care and under the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God for healing and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases with difficult cures. Keep your arms away from what frightens you, so that failure in your faith and your name does not escape you: for it is more beneficial to your glory, both now and forever after, to your sanctity.
In fact, Gualia has already discussed some of this in his sections on medicines. "Do not treat bad diseases, so that you are not called bad doctors.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first is the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head, particularly the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the irons of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter is on incisions and punctures, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is on setting bones and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; this chapter is ordered concerning the feet, and the forms of instruments.
I must speak about the qualities of the helpers for that cautery and its hindrances, and in what condition caution should be taken when performing cautery.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of helpers for cautery and its hindrances is long and protracted, subtle by science, and hidden in secrecy; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me only a little of their words suffices, fearing prolixity. ︎
And so I say that you should apply cautery universally to every condition, whether it has matter or not, with the exception of two conditions that are cold without matter.
In a cold and dry condition with matter, it will be disagreed upon; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, while others say the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in an illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inconvenient that a cold and dry illness with moisture, which is hot and dry, should be healed.
And I disagree with those who say the opposite of that, that through cautery every cold and dry illness that comes upon the bodies of men is benefited, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the quality of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I say by the words of that one, that experience has already revealed this to me many times.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary that this be repeated to one who has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cautery through recent practice, and who knows the diversity of human conditions and the dispositions of illnesses within them, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of those.
In other conditions, there is no need to fear, especially in cases of cold and moist diseases, for all doctors agree on this matter, and they are not uncertain about treating them with a cautery in those cases.
And know, sons, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and its goodness is also discussed in cautery with medication, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not harm the neighboring member except for a small damage.
But the action of medication burns also reaches the members neighboring it, and quickly brings about difficult healing in the ailing member and quickly increases.
But the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it causes superfluousness. And it is known to us through experiment and long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it has not been read in my book, I would have here hidden for you with fire a secret, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which it drives out diseases, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would have sharpened your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by accidental weather conditions is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for painful or necessary pains, fissures and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest it be feared that something worse may come from them than a small harm caused by the weather.
And do not let this enter your minds, o sons, for only the common people and foolish doctors believe this. Therefore, at that illness which is cured by cautery there is always a return, and they consider this consequence.
And the reason is not as they think because of this, for cautery is only used in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which are the cause of the pains.
But, however, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of speed of action and power of its operation, as well as the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his strength, as well as what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what has come to him from his diet and similar causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few excesses and humidity, such as a toothache for pain and similar things. It is possible that in this case there will be no return of that pain, but it happens rarely. 》
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a true statement, not because I understand it as such, but because I believe that there is no cure that benefits with medicine or any other means except cautery.
And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort in medicine is only when administering certain methods of treatment for some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and finally at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it proves effective then. And therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the site of cautery does not burn, as if this were absolutely true, for I have already seen and found that this is not the case except in certain bodies without others, and cauterizing with it is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, for it becomes ignited according to the amount you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a burn. And if you place the fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and some thin sheets fall into the fire because of the occupation of that.
"And for this purpose, a cautery with iron should be used, because it is lighter and more precise for the operation.
"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those from the head down to the feet, so that I can provide the inquirer with what he wants.
The first chapter.
"This cautery addresses the humidity and cold that cause these two accidents, which are two causes of a condition called corissa, characterized by an abundance of flux in the head, from the temples to the ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and universally any illness caused by cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
"The method for this cautery is as follows: first, instruct the patient to be evacuated with a cathartic medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual habits.
"And then instruct him to shave his head with a razor, and then have that person sit between your hands on a bench, and let him place his feet on the ground.
And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils, on the tip of the nose between its wings. But nevertheless, when your finger has reached the middle of the nose, mark that spot with a needle, and then ignite the pointed cautery made from olive wood like this:
And then place that [cautery] on the marked spot, allowing it to descend, while you hold your hand tightly and turn that [cautery].
And then lightly lift your hand and observe the spot, and if you see any amount of bone exposed, even as small as a grain of barley, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand with that iron, or another like it, until you see what I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days.
And then place on it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on until the scab of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the spot with tetrapharmacon ointment until it heals.
And they say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm heals, because it is better and more beneficial.
E dixerunt alguns d'ells que hauria de ser cauteritzada la columna vertebral entre els ossos, i que s'hauria de mantenir el cauteri fins que es cicatritzi alguna part de l'estructura de l'os.
And immediately scrape away that which is adjacent to the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that with the cautery you should reach deep until it strongly presses on the bone and breaks it, and this is the method of small incision. And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in everything, but only in some men out of fear; and leave that one alone, for it is better to be safe than sorry, because the head is weakened by the loss of its continuity, just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one should proceed and work safely.
Chapter Two.
On Cauterizing the Head.
When there is chronic and prolonged pain throughout the entire head in the patient, and they have used powders, cupping glasses, head purges, plasters, helmets, caps, bonnets, and similar remedies, especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help them at all, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; it is not frail but finds great benefit, then cauterize that one again with another cautery after the first one. And then cauterize that area on the crown of his head with a cautery until the blood vessel is severed. Cut the blood vessel and expose the bone to the extent we have described, then cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the vein is located. And ease your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say this because the cautery used for the crown of the head and the occiput should be finer than that used for the middle of the head; and this is its form.
Headaches.
On the Cautery for Recent Migraine
When there is severe pain on the top of the head or when pain spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purifying medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; if this does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning instrument or with iron. ︎
"However, with a pointed cautery made from copper, you should take a piece of wool, clean it and bind the patient's extremities with it from both ends. "Then make an incision in the painful area of the temple with a sharp lancet, inserting it until it reaches the bone, but not too deep.
"Then apply pressure to the patient with a compress for about three hours; then remove it and apply wool, leaving the wound open for two or three days, and then place a cold compress on the area until the swelling subsides.
"Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
"And if you wish, do this with some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
"But if you want to perform cauterization with iron according to this method, here is the shape of the cautery:
"It is called a 'nail iron,' because the tip of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
"Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand — to prevent the iron from burning too much — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of him that is burnt by the tip of the cautery is such that it covers most of him, raise your hand to ensure that the artery underneath is not burnt, so that blood flow is not disrupted.
And then you should place a cloth in salt water and put it on the area, leaving it for three days; then place a soft cloth with a border around it, and then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you see, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel as with a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this particular unnamed area.
Chapter Four.
On Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
When you treat a migraine with the previously mentioned remedies, as well as those listed under headaches, and the treatment is not effective, and sometimes due to the severity of the illness, what was said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough. Then it is necessary for you to heat the scalpel until it is white-hot, because you signify on the area of the pain with a line the length of which is most of the finger, or however long that may be; and place your hand once and strongly so that you do not cut the artery and reach the bone.
This text appears to be discussing the importance of preventing jaw issues that can arise from excessive chewing or jaw locking, as well as protecting against spasms. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that bursts, because in its rupture there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; and leave the operation to someone who has experience at first.
And I will recall the treatment for an accidental blood flow from the artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
And if this illness does not subside with this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery as we said in the chapter on stretching of the artery with a cautery having two edges, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter .5
On cauterization for ear pain.
When ear pain occurs due to cold and is treated with purgative medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called "puncture," and this is its form:
And then prick near the joint, and let it be led around the entire ear in such a way that a wheel is turned, or on the edge of each lobe if the pain is in one. And with the cautery at the root of the ear, prick little by little until you feel the spot with your finger.
And if the cautery points are on the whole ear, and you cut it off, and then cure the spots until they are healed.
Chapter VI
On the cauterization of a hernia (turtura is an old term for hernia).
A hernia that is cured by cauterization is only of the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterizing the type that comes from dryness or nerve spasm.
When you treat that type of hernia with cups, purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment is not successful, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the area that appears healthy.
And the manner of cauterization is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the highest point of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another one, whose length should be according to the length of this finger, and place your hand with the cautery until it has burned half the amount of the thickness of a reed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutler, whose shape is as follows: But, however, it should be more subtle than that one, somewhat like a wasp; and it is necessary that the blade in place of excess thickness should be a little thinner.
And then care for the area with water that has been processed beforehand until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On cauterizing ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape. And the method of using the cautery is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it should be treated with warm water.
Chapter VIII
About cauterizing for forgetfulness done by flame.
Therefore, at the beginning, give the patient large cups and pills to cleanse him.
Then shave the head of the patient completely and place on his crown an ointment of cedar, as described in the treatise on ointments.
And do this several times, because that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the same order that I have already mentioned.
And thus if he is cured by these means; and if not, then make three cauteries on the rear part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cauterized area with warm water.
But if there is an increase and the patient tolerates it, then make a cautery in the middle of the head; and if there is greater increase, then cauterize on both temples.
"Then care for that person who is sick; and let the cautery be olive oil, as described earlier.
"Chapter 9.
"On the Cauterization of Parasites and the Softening of the Entire Body.
"Ensure that you process the head for modification with jars and water as mentioned; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the back of the head, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
"And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body due to excessive heat and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and then cauterize until it becomes red from his neck down, and raise your hand. "Then care for that person who is sick, and let this be an olive oil cautery.
"Chapter 10.
"On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
"An epileptic is not cauterized unless their epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And so it is necessary to modify the brain of the patient at its beginning with years and with the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the exception of the medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargles and chewables that serve to cleanse, for several days before that, with the improvement of food.
Then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and above each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize with the aforementioned cauteries, having first paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive-sized, as previously stated.
But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned, having first paralyzed (it).
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water that purifies their brain according to what has been said earlier in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a proper tourniquet from it around the circle (of the head), and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be sitting comfortably, and should be held by all sides.
Then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to use ancient oil of sheep. And heat that (liniment) over the fire for a temperate warmth according to measure, which the said patient endures when it is most in him. Then pour that into the middle of his head on the circle, and let it seep in until he is soaked.
And do this with the patient every day for one week, along with his other good regimen until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to his size, as long as you have a hand with an arranged cautery: this is the type of cautery which moistens the brain equally. 😊
And then place that bandage soaked in vinegar or gray linen on it.
Chapter XII
On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Ear
When you have recognized the onset of water in the ear by the signs that I mentioned in the division, begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and keep them from all moisture.
And make them sweat in a bath of warm water for several days.
Then instruct the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the water flow starts in both ears, or only on one side if the water starts in one ear.
Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that are under the cord, and let the cauteries be in that place as far as the length of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow from the patient, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come with wisdom about the removal of arteries and their excision, as well as the prevention of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries very close together.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and persistent, traveling through the veins and arteries visible on the surface of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as described in the chapter on water falling into the eyes, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if more is needed, then also cauterize along the entire edge of the eye's tail towards the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14
On the Cauterization of Nose Odor.
When you treat this condition with the water we mentioned in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give the patient to drink for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a mid-sized cautery and an olive-sized cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two points above both eyebrows, just below the hairline slightly.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is how the pointed cautery looks like.
Chapter XV.  (Capítulo XV.)
On the softening cautery of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its shape.
And if you cauterize it, do so on both eyebrows slightly with two points in all parts, and they should be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs have turned inward and punch the eye.
When the hairs of the eye have turned inward to such an extent that they puncture the eye, cautioning is done in those cases in two ways, for it can be done with iron or with burning medicine.
Sure, let's translate that sentence:
Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English:
And then place a cotton soaked in egg white or a paste of flour on the wound.
Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
Then cauterize over the figure that you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the vein appears like a myrtle leaf, fully visible.
The sign of success of the surgical procedure is that you will see the eyelid of the wound already retracted and its hair raised towards the point of the wound.
Therefore, raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place cotton with a border on it until the scar is healed. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again as you did the first time.
But if the hairs are still on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
And place the medicine on the wound and press it gently until the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is in them like fire.
And so, when the patient perceives that they have found burning, then remove the medicine and cover it with a clean cloth; once the burning has ceased, then replace the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid is already lifted as if it were washed by constricting with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, place more of the medicine on the area where the medicine has not been applied and do not neglect until your operation is completed and the wound is healed.
And then place on him a bandage with a border until the swelling of the inflammation is removed, and then cure it with healing ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation you must keep watch with diligent care that none of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after some days the eyelid becomes soft and any hair touches the wound, then repeat your medicine on that part of the eyelid which has become soft, and exactly as you did at the beginning, and then cover it until it is healed.
"And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that men's heels are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your treatment is based on this.
"And the path of correctness will not be hidden from those who study this art.
Chapter XVII.
"About cauterizing a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
"When you are treating a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have another assistant hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with their head.
"And then place a piece of cotton wool soaked in egg white or chickpea flour on the patient's eye.
"And then heat the cautery, the form of which is this:
"which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture feather, with one end being the cautery.
"And if you wish, it may also be inserted into the other end. And if you wish, it may be treated in this manner.
But nevertheless, that which is hollow is better for the treatment.
Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place the cautery over it, which should be well-lit. Hold it with your healing hand a little above the cautery hole near the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray part of the wound and burn it.
And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more, if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a pad over that spot with a bandage and apply a drying ointment until it heals.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place a sharp, corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in this chapter.
There is another way to cauterize a fistula that some of the ancients first said: take care of the place of the fistula and open it up, and then place in that crack a very thin needle whose shape matches it; and pour into that the quantity of an ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with the needle with good steadiness, so that the patient is not disturbed so that the molten lead does not enter the wound of that; and you should place over the wound of the patient a cotton pad infused in egg white or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the water we have mentioned for cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a poultice from the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nasal cavity.
Chapter XVIII
About the cauterization of the cleft of the feet.
Many times these fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the water we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment does not work, then burn it with a small pointed cautery according to this form that follows:
And let its cavity be according to the delicacy of the knife (or blade).
Then press that gently into those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and swells, then bursts, and then becomes chronic, and runs with pus, and a fistula is formed, and you treat it and the treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you burn a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and put the burning cautery into the orifice of the fistula, and place your hand underneath until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; and at the end do this one or two times; and then treat it with the water we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E therefore if the wound is cut and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bones according to their chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure them with medicines and they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and quickly ignite the cautery in the form that will be shown hereafter, so that you put the end of it over the tooth and insert it into it quickly, and hold your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then pass the cautery over it several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then stop it, because the decayed tooth is fixed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21.
"About the cautery of tooth pain.
"When tooth pain is due to coldness or if there is a wound or ulcer and treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterize it using two methods: either cauterize with cow's hoof, or cauterize with fire.
"Cauterizing with hoof is done by taking the hoof of a cow and placing it in burning hot iron, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and immediately dip that into the heated hoof and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it becomes cold.
"And then repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
"And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the hoof mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and place heated iron on top until the iron reaches the marrow of the tooth cavity.
"However, the cauterization with fire is done by using a hollow reed or iron tube, and there should be some thickness in its core so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
"And then heat the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth while holding it with your hand until the cautery becomes cold; repeat this several times because the pain should subside either that day or the next.
And it is necessary that, by pressing that cautery into the mouth of the patient, he should fill his mouth with good bedding and hold it for an hour, and then remove it; and this is the way to use the cautery.
And you should cauterize with whatever material you have at your disposal according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter .22
On the Cauterization of Prolapsed Organs.
When prolapsed organs are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines, and you see that the digestion of these is slight, then you should ignite the cautery in the form shown below, which has two openings so that smoke may exit from one end. Place the heated cautery on the aposteme (swelling) once, and again if necessary, until the swelling subsides.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth soaked in vinegar on it until what the fire has burned is removed.
And then care for that person with ointments, bandages, and cloths until they are healed.
Chapter XXIII.
About cauterizing a throat with hoarseness and constriction of the airways.
When humidity comes upon the lung channels, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness and oppression, then the patient should first be evacuated with purgative medicines, and afterwards you should cauterize them in the depressed area of the throat.
And take care not to reach the throat with the cautery, nor burn its cord too much.
And then cauterize them with another cautery at the junction of the neck at their last vertebra. And let his cautery be a small one, as described previously.
Then care for that person with the previously mentioned water until they are healed.
Chapter XXIV.
About cauterizing lung ailments and coughs.
When cough and lung ailments are due to cold humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old ailment, then cauterize them with two cauteries on the collarbone in the depressed places called lion and boar; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and let the cauteries be small as described previously. ➤
"And if you want, perform your cautery point with the pointed tool that is called 'punctum', whose shape precedes in the cauterization of earache pain.
"Make points in the case of those [conditions]; and then treat them with the remedy that has been prescribed until they are healed.
"And there are three types of pointed tools for cauterization: with one you can perform three cauteries in the following way:
Chapter 25
"On the cauterization of titillus, which is the head of the penis.
"When the head of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in time, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal. Then, by making a slight movement, it returns as it should, as we have testified. Therefore, you must first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; then raise the scrotum which is at the inner part of the penis towards the outer parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
And then heat the cautery which has two ends; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates through to the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will have four points.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, because there are eight cauteries.
And then place powdered salt on the cautery, and then make the patient rest peacefully, and let the member not be moved for any time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done later, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several cauteries, because the joint will be strengthened and the moisture will be dried out and the patient will be healed.
Chapter XXVI
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture arise in the stomach to the point that it expels its contents and causes abundant vomiting, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without success, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed on their back, and extend their hands and feet, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery below the soles of the feet with a pointed cautery the length of a finger, and two cauteries below the armpits of the same cautery, so that it forms a triangular figure; and the distance between them should not be too great to cause blistering. 》
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the blade of a sword, then it should be:
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking it where you fear this cautery will cause harm: and know that you should test on the stomach first with a probe, according to the amount you wish, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then treat it with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the hot cautery of the foot.
When pain in the foot is caused by coldness, moisture, or excessive flatulence, and its normal condition has been disturbed by superfluous excretions, and the patient is treated with the water we have mentioned and not with cupping, then it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back, and test with three cauteries as shown in this form and quantity, placing them under the hips, which is the decubitus of a man.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And do not hesitate to use the cautery as much as needed.
If the amount of water exceeds half the amount of medicine in the cup, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, who has already spread out his thighs and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you are skilled and prudent in this art.
And beware not to overdo the cauterization, and let the cup of all the water be adjusted so that the whole body is healed and reaches into the intestines, for the cup here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28
On piercing a boil on the foot with a cautery.
When you want to excise or pierce a boil on the foot and you wish to know if that boil is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be very sharp and often wearies the doctors who care for him.
This text appears to be discussing medical procedures for treating an abscess (apostema). Here is the line-by-line translation: And cauterize with that and a cautery until the entire vein is burned, until it reaches the vessel, until there is healthy tissue.
And then treat that person for the cure of other abscesses until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except for that which has been studied in the art of medicine and is known to be effective against many diseases; however, one should experiment with caution in this operation, but leave that to us who are more experienced and know better.
Chapter .29.
On the Cauterization of Pleurisy.
The ancients said that to cauterize pleurisy caused by dry humors, it should be done in this manner: take a long, dry reed, about the thickness of a finger, and prepare it for use.
Then dip that reed in oil and place it on the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly inclined towards the chin, and with two cauteries in that place which is inclined between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly inclined towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries in the back; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary for you to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be clearly visible in the procedure.
And some ancient people said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and glowing hot, and they place it in the area between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and expels the pus, as we have said in the case of an abscess on the foot.
But in this procedure with the cautery there is fear, for someone could die immediately if they puncture a fistula that has not healed.
Chapter XXX
On the Cauterization of the Spleen
When you treat the illness of the spleen with the method we have described for treatment in the division, and your treatment does not help, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines of cautery along the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cauteries on the foot, whose figures have preceded this.
And between each cautery there should be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said for the cauteries on the foot equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be raised on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is to ignite the cautery with two movements, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the handle that is located near the spleen so that the left side of the patient can lie flat.
And let your lifting with which you raise the handle be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two movements, one after the other, into that opening through which you have penetrated the handle from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three movements.
And then you care for the cautery since it has ceased to throw sparks after too many days, because it is more convenient than the other previously mentioned causes in the treatment.
Chapter .XXXI
On Cauterizing Dropsy Patients
Do not cauterize in dropsy patients except in the ankles properly.
Here's the translation of the provided sentence: And let the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then lay aside the cautery, opened for such that you can hold it for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from the treatment near the cautery with water, but rather add two helpers to him, and hastily dress his wound with aid.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be sharp, as its form has been described above, and it is that with which the back is cauterized, it should be olive-shaped according to its form as described above.
Chapter .xxxii
On the Cauterization of Feet and Hips.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular veins, lift your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, because the water saturates again.
The cautery should be in this form: And then make two cauteries on each hip, and on each hip let the cautery be made with the pointed end of the cautery. And let there be two cauteries according to the length of the cushion: place one at the upper part and the other at the middle of the cushion; and on each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that no pus comes out of it.
And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter .33
On the Cauterization of the Abdomen
When the abdomen is afflicted by cold and dampness, which weakens the faculties – namely, the digestive and retentive faculties found in the stomach and intestines – it should be treated with various methods of treatment and regimens. Sometimes patients suffer from an ailment that causes the faculties to leave their place; then cauterize that area with a large cautery on the patient's stomach, as was previously described for the cauterization of the stomach, using circular cauteries and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as subtle claw-shaped cauteries; and one or two cauteries on the alcatin.
And if there is an excess of humidity and the patient can withstand it, then cauterize in that area on the bladder and on the intestines, and carefully place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect treatment which will not cause harm.
"Chapter 34.
"On cauterizing old hemorrhoids.
"When there are old hemorrhoids or one of the large humors that cause swelling or corrupt moisture, and they are not healed with the water mentioned in the division, then use three pointed cauteries on the pus below the small of the back in a triangle shape, and one cautery above the navel, cutting through two fingers' width.
"And if you believe that his stomach is swollen and his food not properly digested, and his face sometimes pale, then cauterize that part of the stomach with a large cautery as previously stated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on his gallbladder with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then treat him until he is cured.
"Chapter 35.
"On cauterizing abscesses near their opening.
"When you cut open an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. "Then insert that heated into the cut abscess, and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, because if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with an ointment suitable for their condition until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the surface, it will be more effective in helping.
Chapter .xxxvi.
About the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in certain parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that has been described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has an old fistula that occurs naturally and it is exuding pus and corrupted humors, it is more fitting to probe it with a fine probe, and then find out the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray (i.e., a thin, pointed cautery). And then place this heated cautery into the fistula, and according to the amount in which you insert the probe.
And repeat this process with the cautery until all the corrupt flesh is burned at least once or twice or three times, according to your needs.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if there is a fistula going into the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it will not penetrate.
And then care for the place so that it may heal.
And if the place is sealed and all the material has been removed from it, and it remains that way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or the bone beneath is rotting, or this happens for one of those reasons which will be remembered in its place.
Chapter .XXXVII.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When there is pain in the hemorrhoids due to cold or excessive flatulence, and for this reason the patient's anus is irritated, then it is necessary to cauterize the area above the hemorrhoids with a pointed cautery on each hemorrhoid, using the nail of which I have mentioned before.
And make a strong cautery with the second [point], a little deeper, so that three lines of cauteries will be formed, and thus they will be more effective in helping.
It looks like you haven't provided the actual text of the medieval medical treatise for this particular example (Capitol .xxxviii). Please provide the specific text or line you would like translated, and I will do my best to interpret and translate it into English for you.
"About the Cauterization of the Bladder.
"When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area just below the bladder where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with a pointed instrument on the right side of the bladder and with another on the left side.
"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of coldness in the person; and cauterize that area with a pointed instrument just below the back, or with two instruments if necessary.
"And let the cautery be made accordingly as needed.
"Chapter XXXIX
"About Cauterizing the Uterus.
"When coldness and moisture occur in the uterus, thus preventing conception, and menstrual blood is corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and pain occurs during its passage, then the area should be cauterized with three instruments around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with an instrument just below the back, or with two instruments, and let the cautery be made accordingly.
Chapter 40
On the Cautery for the Dislocation of the Ankle
When moistness and mucus are infused into the ankle area, and this is caused by its displacement from its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared side by side. And the location of the dislocation is found in the swollen part.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular-shaped cautery, because you will have marked with a test in the circle of the ankle as it is turned, and this way the affected area will be centered within the circle.
And let the shape of the cautery previously described be used for the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three small cauteries using a large olive-shaped one.
And let the cautery be made according to the size of the entire hernia; and then care for it until it is healed. xspace
Chapter 41
On Cautery for Sciatic Nerve Pain
When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and moisture, the patient is treated with the previously mentioned water-based remedies, but if they are ineffective or outdated, then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using either foul-smelling pills, artificial pills, or similar; and then cauterize them.
And the manner of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the affected area on the broad part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and perform this with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the size of a finger's thickness, and whether the cautery is small or large.
But sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which should be a continuous and burning circle around the entire tendon.
And this is the manner of cauterization for gout when the pain is located at the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the knee, four fingers below the navel.
And if you are using a cautery knife, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the tendon.
And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to other parts of the body, especially in the joints, then cauterize those areas as well with the cautery at three points or four, or more if necessary.
And if the patient indicates that there is pain beneath the nail towards the toe, then cauterize it with a cautery knife.
And be careful in all cautery that you do not go too deep with the cautery to the point of burning nerves or large vessels, as this could harm the patient by causing infection or contraction.
And I have seen some cases where the person who performed the cautery went too deep and the foot swelled up until the tumor reached the foot, and then it was pierced and the whole foot became infected. And shortly after, he suffered from a severe stomachache, and then death followed.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise have said that in the cautery of water, one should use a cautery like this: make it similar to an iron circle, whose circumference is half a palm; and let its openings be according to the thickness of a fingernail or a little less.
And inside that circle there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the width of a finger; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these chains should be one finger or two fingers, and make on these edges a decent iron border on the circles; and this is its form:
Next, heat it in the fire until it becomes red and sparks, then place it on the open wound of the patient while they are lying on their side. And therefore cauterize with three pointed cauteries at once.
And then let it be for three days; and then bandage it with a border, leaving the wound open for many days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Says Al-Zahrawi: "O my sons, we use this type of cautery very little due to the fear of dealing with it, and because we find few people who are skilled in handling it.
But for those suffering from these cauteries, they will find the place to be painful.
But make cauteries with adherent medicines, and you should make two circles having an armilla perforated in which they can put the handle of the iron door; let the length of the walls be at the height of two fingers or as needed.
And if the spaces which are between each joint of the finger; and they have been opened from below and above, and they should contain themselves between them according to this manner:
And then place the patient lying on their side over the affected joint, and press your hand over the joint; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that quality be with a small fire little by little, and keep it for the duration of one hour, and the patient will endure the biting and adjustment — because this remedy bites like fire — until the biting stops.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the joint with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place a cold compress on the joint until the blackness of the bruise has dissipated, and leave it like this for several days, and there will run from it a pus; this is called healing.
And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the hip or thigh, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done for the joint as well.
And this is the method of using hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and unslaked lime, each in equal parts; grind them and place them in a new vessel, leaving a small hole in the bottom through which water can enter as needed.
Then place another pot under the first pot, and pour over the alkali and quicklime twice its volume in fresh water; when you have mixed these together with your hand into a good paste, allow the liquid to drain through the hole into the lower pot.
Then adjust all this water and pour it over fresh lime and new alkali, because at that point it will have a very strong acidity, which is used in many medical operations and for the cauterization of other members, as it produces a burning effect.
And similarly for some medicines with which one cauterizes, such as terebinth and honey of aniseed, also mixed with soap.
And Valerius recounts from an ancient author the operation and treatment by which watery pain and sciatica are cured, and he greatly praises this treatment, saying that no other cure is necessary, and because it is cured by one application as he relates, for he quickly leaves the bath as soon as he enters it.
And it is that a poultice of green henbane should be taken; and if green henbane is not found, then take fresh figs; and everything should be thoroughly crushed with a little gray salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the knee, or on the thigh, and bandaged.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours, or however long the patient feels relief from the pain.
And then have him enter a bath and when his body is reddened from the heat, make him leave the bath and stand on the ground, because the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these remedies, except in the case of body purging.
But Escorides said that when the straight vein is cauterized with a goat's hair, it helps him very well; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
Then take a dry goat hair and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool, and press it in so that it is spread out. And then continue doing this, and do not stop until the feeling of biting penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called "cautery of cows.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Back Pain
Sometimes pain in the back is caused by many things, such as a fall or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and damp material.
Cauterization is only effective in this specific case caused by the infusion of cold material.
Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purging pills and similar medicines, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to the length of the person. After that, place ten cauteries on each line, or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the medicine.
And let the cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in a cruciform pattern like this:
**Chapter 43.**
**On Cauterization at the Onset of Jaundice.**
**Many observations indicate that this illness often afflicts young children; and the first sign of its onset in children is swelling and restlessness around their eyes.**
**And you will find in the lower part of the back, near the buttocks, that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.**
**Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery like this:** **so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.**
**And if you wish, you can also cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines long.** **And the points should be close together.**
**Then, take care of the area until it is healed with what we have mentioned above.**
**But beware that a cautery should not be administered for jaundice caused by nerve spasms.**
**Chapter 44.**
**On Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.**
**When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.**
And therefore when gout is cured by treatment due to cold and the pain is not relieved, then apply cautery.
And if you cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with several cauteries.
And let it be cauterized with an olive-shaped tool, which looks like this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries in all directions using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand before using the cautery, but only hold it by the handle.
And if the pain moves into the toe and the foot, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called suagra, then prick around the fingers like this: prick along these two lines.
And if pain remains in the said places, then puncture around the circle of the nails on each finger and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pain extends to the shoulders or arms after several days, then cauterize all parts of the limbs.
And do not evacuate the patient without proper management and reception of medicine, for if good care is taken and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Wounds.
When there is a break in the intestines and they protrude before the hernia, and this begins to happen, then you must tell the patient to leave off their food for that day and use gentle causes so that the opening of the belly does not increase.
And then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until they are thrown out or the hernia or intestines appear.
And then return with the said words and signs, and try to open the break over the bone of the patella, indicating the extreme end which should be similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
until it becomes very red and emits sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under him, another servant on his legs, and another on his chest, holding his hands.
And then place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and push until you reach the midpoint of the distal phalanx; repeat this action if you did not succeed in the first attempt to reach the bone.
Be careful of the movement of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and cause death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you with the cautery do not reach the bone, your operation will not be effective.
And it is fitting for a child's cautery to be delicate according to their size and age. ︎
Then care for the cautery site for three days with bandages until the scab of the fire has fallen off.
And then care for him with other ointments until he is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days, until the area and the wound are sealed.
And it is necessary to adjust his diet according to the duration of his treatment and to prevent his stomach from getting too full, lest the intestines come out due to the effort of healing.
And when he wishes to get up after about 40 days, then administer a properly prepared poultice, and let him keep it for another 40 days.
And he should be spared from work and from excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when he follows this complete treatment, he will surely be healed.
And I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At first, and if you do not wish them to bleed, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is expelled from the intestines be like the third part of it; and then care for him with what we have said, and he will not die.
And some say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this, because it is indicated by experience:
Sure, I can help translate that sentence for you:
Chapter 46
On the Cautery of a Hernia
When in some members [limbs] by accident or blow pain occurs and that pain persists for a long time and you do not comfort the patient with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of every member according to its greatness and smallness, its virtues and faults, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary for those pains to be transmitted from member to member close to it, so you must catch them with cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47
On the Cautery of Leprosy
Lepers are sometimes cured with a cautery, and especially so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
And so when you want to cauterize this [patient], consider if the leprosy is common and of the type that we have said in the division, and it has not yet begun to spread, and you fear for the patient that corruption will encompass all of his body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another below it, even with the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, with the cautery in your hand, press a little into the bone to make a slight impression, and from this remove the scabies, so that the expulsion of large vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the spleen as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on both shoulders of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the waist, and one on the waist, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the soles of the feet, and one on each sole, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the wrists, and with two on the fingers of their hands and feet; cauterize that over all the joints of the aforementioned hands and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the groin.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it will be; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cauteries like others do, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and the joints, as previously specified by the types of tools.
And then care for the cauterized area with powder made from ground ivy mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals.
Chapter .xlviii
On the Cautery of Stupor
When any member is benumbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the cord. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes a numbness that should be in the hands and feet, or in the spine of the back, is cauterized where the nerves emerge that move that member, and the numbness is removed.
"But do not proceed with this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves that move throughout the body.
"Chapter 49.
"On the Cauterization of Warts, which are Tumors.
"When warts are old and you do not apply to them any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery for a short while, according to the size of the wart's surface, until its whiteness and color disappear, and its color changes.
"Then treat it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils, olive oil, and rue leaves, along with pigeon blood or blackbird blood, ensuring each ingredient is properly divided and all are well mixed together. Then take a clean cloth, soak it in this mixture, and place it on the affected area until it heals.
"Chapter 50.
"On the Cauterization of Crabs (cancer).
"When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its entire circumference as if it were turning.
"And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the lesion; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen some times.
And it is more appropriate that he be cauterized around him in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II
On the Cauterization of Paralysis
When someone is delayed in healing, and this is due to excess humors or the condition of the patient, who is old and weak, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the healing of the paralysis; then cauterize around him with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and then leave it alone so that it will hasten in healing.
But if you want to perforate him with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows: and place it in the middle of the paralyzed area until it penetrates the spine.
And if you cauterize him in that lower area so that the arm's body is relieved; and then care for it until he is healed.
Chapter III
On Cauterization of Erosion
Erosion is the walking corruption in the limb, which erodes it like fire consuming dry wood.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts to translate it accurately:
And immediately cauterize it entirely until you have removed all the corruption and there is no remaining cause of it.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas constantly a mixture of oil until all the scabs are removed and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with flesh-generating ointment.
However, if after three days the flesh that grows is healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then you must repeat the cautery on the parts that remain corrupted.
And sometimes a corrosive medicine is used, because it serves as a substitute for cautery. However, cauterization with fire is more effective against pus.
And I have already explained the treatment with corrosive medicine in the previous section, so take that when you have need of it.
Chapter 53
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions
Often one sees in the parts below the affected foot what is called a nail, which is a large, deep wound that penetrates the foot; and these are cauterized in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
"However, the cautery with fire is that which ignites the pointed cautery like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the entire nail, and it should be of fine edges.
"Then place the glowing nail on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. "And let it be for three days until it begins to cast a scab. "And then bandage it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the bandage on it for one night, because by morning it will be healed from its causes.
"And then treat the area with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
"And if it does not heal and many small growths appear on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should apply cautery with water to those areas. Take a thin needle or pin made of iron or bird feather and place it on the nail; then pour a little hot water into the needle's tip, hold it firmly, and roll it gently with your hand all over the affected area, pressing the edge of the needle into the root of the nail. The hot water will find its way to the core of the root; wait for the patient to feel the heat for about an hour, then remove it, as the nail with its roots will be healed by morning.
And do similarly with others until all of them are on their bodies.
Then treat those further, after the reasons for the nails have been eliminated with ointments that promote skin growth.
Chapter .43
On Cautery for Tremors
When someone has a tremor due to nerve coldness or fever caused by coldness, or for any similar reason, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
And his tremor will subside, hastening the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter .55
On Cautery for Acute Conditions in the Body
When there are acute eruptions on the body and pustules are formed from coarse corrupted matter, it is necessary at the beginning when they appear to cauterize the head of each fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended with fire; or with a long surgical lancet; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Here's a possible translation of your provided text:
It seems like there might be a mistake in the text you provided for "Capitol lvi." The phrase "Capitol lvi" does not appear to be part of the medieval medical treatise you are referring to. However, I can help you translate the previous lines if needed or provide further assistance with additional text from the same treatise. Please provide more context or the next line from the text for translation.
About the cauterization of blood flow due to an arrow injury.
When you see the signs of blood flow from an arrow injury that has exited the wound or caused damage to tendons or muscles and is difficult to stop, it is necessary to cauterize it immediately to prevent further complications.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should immediately clamp the orifice of the arrow wound with your hand and place your finger over it, applying pressure until the bleeding stops and does not continue.
Then place in the fire some olive oil burners, both small and large, in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are well alight.
Then take one of these [burners], either small or large, depending on the location and size of the wound where the artery is cut; quickly apply it to the vein after you have removed your finger, and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and sealed.
And if blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the thread and extract the cautery, then immediately take another cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by any other means than four: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted, for when it is extracted its extremities are better burned and the blood is restricted; or let it be tied with thread or a bandage with strong constriction, or medicines that have the power to restrict blood may be placed upon it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with decent compression.
But he who administers decent constriction with a bandage and strong constriction with cloth or by the position of hot compresses and similar things, should act only belatedly.
But if this should happen to someone and neither the physician nor medicine is present, then stop with pressure of the index finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and continue with great constriction until the blood is stopped from the main source of the wound, and do not remove the thread from above the artery; and above the artery, sprinkle with very cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened; and beware that there will be need for cautery or necessary medicine.
Of cutting, puncturing, cupping, bloodletting, and wounds, and their similars.
In the first chapter, we have spoken of all sicknesses in which it is proper to use a fire-cautery and burning medicines, and of the occasions and causes thereof, and of the instruments necessary therefor, with their forms; and I have arranged the chapters of the head downward to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may find relief therein, when he demands it.
And before I begin this, son, you should know that in this chapter is what was lacking in the first chapter on cautery.
And because this requires great care, since in the operation which is frequently done in this chapter, there is evacuation with blood, in which life resides; you must be cautious of the splashing from the vein or the incision over the abscess, or the opening of an fistula, or the cleansing of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or the cutting of stone, and their similars. And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
And I advise you that this should not happen to you, for sometimes those who are healthy can be struck down by many illnesses. And there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be light for them to die, and this is due to the severity of the illness they find themselves in, and because of the length of their illness, and also because the illness is one that signifies death.
And among them is he who gives you his wealth and property, with you expecting health for him, but his illness is fatal.
Therefore, you should not agree to take in the one who comes to you in this manner; and let your caution be greater than greed, and do not presume any cause for this unless you have certain knowledge that proves it to be so, and to which follows a praiseworthy outcome.
And use in the treatment of all your patients the skill of prognosis and diagnosis, for in that lies your help towards acquiring fame and remembrance, praise and glory.
"O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and do not remove direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
"And I have arranged this chapter, dividing it into sections as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries, concerning the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may find relief for what you are asking about and what you need.
"First Chapter.
"On the treatment of water, which is contained in the head of infants.
"Know that this illness often comes to children from childbirth, and when the nurse tightly binds the child's head without care.
"And sometimes it happens due to hidden causes which are not known.
"But I have only seen this illness in infants; and all those that I saw met their death, and so it seems to me like an evil work on them.
"And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and the infant's head was always thus swollen until it could no longer move itself because of the greatness of its head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by fire.
And this moisture has accumulated either between the tendon and the bone, or beneath the bone on the fibula.
Because the operation on that area, if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the width, and let the length of the slit be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, if the moisture has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, its sign is that you will see the tendon's sheath open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from within and nothing is hidden from you. It is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
And then extract all the moisture at the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and poultices; and then cover it from above with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandages and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence into English:
And be careful not to cut the artery, as this could cause bleeding and lead to the patient's death due to blood loss accompanied by fluid loss.
Chapter three
When someone experiences cataracts or ruptures in the eyes or feet and it is old age and medical treatments do not help, then the last treatment for this is to cut those two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary that when you want to cut those [arteries] the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; and then have the patient's neck held tight with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulses; and on the areas near the ears press down, and they will hide until in some men.  (This sentence seems to be unfinished or perhaps missing words.)
Then mark the artery with a stylus, and then cut each one with a sharp, well-divided scalpel, pushing until it reaches the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and split it into the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, the blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at once, then you must measure from the ear to the nape of the neck the distance of three fingers, and then probe with your finger, and find the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be drawn is six ounces, and it must not be taken from him more or less, and all this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of infection on the bone, then cut it open so that a suppurating abscess does not form.
And then strengthen the wound with soft pads and linen bandages, and then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When someone has an ancient or sudden acute migraine due to moisture in the brain and the quality of the sinews in the temples, or a very intense and similar headache, and it is not cured by the usual methods of medical treatment, then we have found relief for these illnesses in the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those, as we have shown.
Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein appears clearly to you. Then take the spatula, which has this form: Then you cut through the skin with that tool easily until you reach the vein; and then pour on it oil and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the skin and discover it from all the tissues that were left beneath it, entirely.
However, if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (a small tool), and then cut off a piece of it according to the length by which its ends are stretched and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut off, the blood will not rise entirely.
Then evacuate one to three cups of blood.
And if the vein is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with double strong silk thread or with long ropes, and do not cut off the putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
And approximately incise the superfluous part that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time, or at another nearby time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery between the bones using a bone-pointed cautery until the extremities of it are cut, and it will remain in the place where that same work was done.
And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; because cautery is of those causes that help the finishing moistures, and therefore it is better in the help.
And it is appropriate to remove the arrowheads that have occupied the old wound site, and let them be covered with well-prepared powders, and then treat it with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with bandages until it is healed.
And if during the work another vision happens where blood flows from the arrow wound, then you must quickly restrain that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the wound site, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood is congealed, and sprinkle the wound with very cold water until the sharpness settles, and it is strengthened as needed.
Here's the translation of your sentence:
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both needles be similar. However, if the sharpness is less than that of two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, you may approach too close to each part and cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore, because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be kept in them, and the flesh will be cut lightly.
And this work is better for all works and lighter too.
And let the space that is between two needles be the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the care of the body for acute and burning tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic and it is the body of those veins which are on top of the head outside, do not put any remedy from medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and they feel crawling on their forehead as if it were the crawling of ants, and the eyes of that one become exhausted, wet to such an extent that even their eyelashes are soaked, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients used to perform this operation in the cure of these, and they named that cure with a lancet.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: let one incision be equally distant from the tip of the nose to the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length a little below the movements of the eyelids which are on the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries that are in two layers, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three digits wide.
And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth with which to wipe the blood.
And then insert the speculum with two pointed ends, of which this is the shape of its incision: whose point of entry is between the temples to the second incision. With it, remove everything that is between the two incisions, including the tissue that is on the bone, and then do this from the middle of the first incision to the second incision. And immediately reach into this space and insert at first another time an additional instrument called a cutellar, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp edge against the flesh close to the tendon, and the dull edge inside the bone. Use that instrument until it reaches the middle crack, and with it, cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But continue the incision until it reaches the tendon, and then immediately make another incision into the middle crack until it reaches the other crack.
And since a large quantity of blood flows out, press on the places of the frozen blood clots.
And immediately place on each crack a piece of old cotton cloth, and place over those pills soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure it does not develop into a pustule cautiously.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tepid water, and immediately treat it with an ointment made from basil with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V
Sure, I'll do my best to translate this line by line. Here it goes:
When someone has acute and continuous diarrhea, and the patient's cheeks are often thin, and their appearance is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and have lost hair, and there is a severe headache with subsequent extrusion, then you should know from these symptoms that the diarrhea does not come from the lower veins, but from the internal organs.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: Order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one according to its size (and begin with the left temple incision into the right temple; and let the incision go into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' sinews which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or linen rags. And then cover it with powder mixed in wine and oil to prevent a painful abscess from forming.
And when you remove this and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow on it. And treat that with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster from them and apply it to these wounds for the growth of new flesh.
Chapter 6
On the care of what falls into the ears.
All causes that fall into the ears are of four kinds: either it is a mineral substance or something similar to stone, such as iron or glass; or it is from a plant, such as seeds or beans; or it is a liquid substance, such as water and vinegar and their likenesses; or some kind of creature.
And therefore, when a stone or something similar from these causes falls into the ear and does not fit or grow in the ear, then place the ear towards the sunlight. And if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or sesame onto it, and immediately administer its extraction, make them sneeze with conditionals, and open their nostrils for the event of sneezing. Then place in the ear some weights of cloth or wool and extend the ear to the sides above, because small items are usually expelled with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called subtle gesticulator epicyclical, of which this is the form:
And if it has been forgotten with gestures, it is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle ounce, doubled only a little.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten in this way, then make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing is open except the tube. Then extract it with your breath with strong suction, for many times we have seen this work.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of hawk’s fat or of wax made into a pellet with which birds are caught, a small quantity, and place that at the end of a ray, and then wrap around that a bandage properly placed. Then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And therefore if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have mentioned, then you must cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient, then make that cut between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and with a small incision in the back of the ear, let out the pus from it in its most swollen place. And if the split is in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; then close the split immediately, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause of falling in the ear is one of the waxes that grows and swells, then administer the care and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you at first, then take a thin spatula according to this form: And administer with that the absorption of that wax which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been softened by the steam of the ear, and place that in small pouches, and then extract from those with tweezers or a thin hook, or with suction as we have said, because the removal of it is easier.
But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with some conditions at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour water over that ear where there is water, and if by this it is removed, good; and if not, then take several thin pebbles and stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of these into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with another stone against the stone which is inside the ear. "Therefore, do not cease this with stone until all the water has been expelled.
"Therefore, do not cease this with stone until all the water has been expelled. "And when the water has been completely expelled, you should take some paper or cloth and place one end in the ear, then extend the other end into the fire until it is burnt.
"Then place another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and use a probe in the same way as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
"However, in the case of an animal entering that ear, if it is a small creature similar to a fly, treat it as we have said in the section on flies; but if it is a large creature that causes swelling inside the ear, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the reason for this is that it is lighter than all other things that fall into the ear.
"However, in the case of removing a worm that has been born in the ear, when you treat it with the water we have mentioned in the section and in the treatise on distillations, if your treatment does not succeed, then you should look into the ear towards the sunlight.
And thus if here appears any cause due to worms, then extract it with tweezers or fine forceps. But if no cause appears, then take a canula that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, which has this form: And introduce the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out strongly with it and do this many times until all the worms have been expelled.
But if the patient does not comply with this treatment, then you fill and seal around the circumference of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been tested by the ancients in the cure for worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows: And make it of silver or brass, narrow in shape, and with a small hole at the end, and flat on top.
Therefore, it should be placed so that it fits into the cavity of the canula, where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a small reed and wrap it decently at the end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or water from these medicines through the tube — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cotton on top and press with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And let what has been inserted in the ear be slightly heated with fire first. And ensure that the liquid you will pour into the ear is not too cold, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII
On the treatment of ear blockages.
Sometimes some infants are born with their mothers' unperforated navels in the ear canal due to a wound or a piece of flesh stuck there; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not recognize the sound, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And that which occurs at the front of the ear, which does not perceive sound, is in the greatest difficulty for healing.
And in that moment when you achieve the [state/condition], it is necessary for you to place the patient's ear toward the sun and observe that. And if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a thin spatula like this one:
If the affected area is small and one part is sharp while the other is not; and if the spatula is two fingers long, it will not cause damage to the ear.
And so if the swelling is due to flesh born in the ear or in its meat, then take that [swelling] with subtle scissors and cut it vigorously until all the flesh is removed.
And if the swelling is in the edge of the ear, then take a thin reed long and warm it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the meat of the ear.
And so if you notice swelling with water that the patient finds easily, due to heaviness of hearing, try to relieve the pressure of it gently; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth made of linen according to the quantity and width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some liquid, dip it in rosewater and sprinkle it over the wound three times daily; and if you see that the ear has already formed a pustule, then it is necessary to remove the liquid and replace it with another liquid which you will wrap in a cerate made from rose oil until the pustule subsides; and then cure that until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use other remedies that restrict blood flow, which are described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the care of athelia, which affects the eyelids.
Athelia that affects the eyelids of the eyes can sometimes be moist, and other times dry.
Therefore, you should have them held with pliers or tweezers, and then cut them off with the edge of their roots, and then place [something] on the areas as described.
But if pain with blood flow occurs, then cauterize them with a subtle, pointed cautery.
And the best cauterization is to do it near the incisions, and they often return when there remains any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of growths that occur on the eyelids of the eyes.
Often in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause similar to a growth occurs in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called a growth.
And it is an accumulation of thick fluid in the eyelids below and above.
Therefore, the operation on them is such that you should first consider if the swelling in them is due to something coming out of the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, cut over that with an incision through the length, and then carefully drain it from all parts until it is dry, and then suspend it with thread and cauterize it.
And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitching; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, then no harm will come to you from that, because the juice of it restores and heals that place.
And if the swelling inclines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should cut the inner surface, and then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with thread, or whatever incision you find necessary, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this will be noticed in no case.
And at the beginning, wash the wounds with salt water; and treat the area with water that encourages healing until it is healed.
Chapter .10
Of the treatment of cicatrix on the eyelid above the wound.
Cicatrix is the growth that forms on the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children, worsening their vision and sometimes causing them to lose sight in one eye; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are constantly falling from them.
And for this reason you see these children squinting all the time, and even when they sleep; and their eyelids are swollen, which already covers inflammation, and there is a sign of blindness in the eye; and when you press on that spot with your fingers, you feel blindness inside them.
And the way to operate on that is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then place a cloth over them and make a circle on it according to the size that contains arthritis from all sides, and then place that circle on the affected area and press with your fingers all around so that blindness is gathered in the middle of the circle. Then open the middle of that humidity with a spatula that cuts with a longitudinal fissure, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
In the patient's abdomen, it is necessary for you to cut through the entire colon until you reach the rectum, because in the most severe cases, a fistula forms in the rectum through an opening according to the shape of white hair.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges and turn it over in your right and left hands until it is emptied.
And be careful not to push into the opening with the spatula, so that you do not reach the bowels and tear it.
But if you do not see the anus at the beginning of the opening, then you should gently push into the opening until the anus appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area and secure those with bandages.
And sometimes use salt, apply it to the cavity of the opening so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
And then care for it until it is healed.
But if an abscess forms in that place, then treat it with heated plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI
Of ways of touching the eye.
When hairs have grown on the eyelids of the eyes below the natural hairs and have become old, they touch the eye and cause various ailments such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids, until this causes destruction of the eye, which is called touching of the eye. The cure is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine, as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or with needles, as I will explain.
Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. And if it is turned up, that is good; and if not, insert a needle in that one which has the hair from the side below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above, and this should be — close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born — close to the hairs, and pull the thread towards the top with the eyelid, and turn that one up with the ray.
And then open the inner part of the eyelid just below the lashes with a spatula touching the lacrimal duct leading to the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the pus and place small cotton or cloth particles under the eyelid, and then seal it over the eyelid with a tent, and let it be so as a figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure (shape of the myrtle leaf) matches the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people. There are those who need a large quantity to be incised from the eyelid, corresponding to the amount by which the eyelid has become softened.
And then open with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs and its thickness is like that of a king (a thick coin or large denomination).
And then place the scalpel in one of the two corners of the incision, and then scrape all of it away, and then join together the two lips with a thin thread or fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two eyebrows with some viscous substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do nothing.
And then release the suture of the thread within three or four days, and then care for that.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and care for it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the scarring of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients said about healing.
But nonetheless, be attentive to the patient and it will be a good operation, and there should not be any fear in this regard.
And there is another method of treatment, which consists of making on the eyelid a figure like this, similar to a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three stitches, separated and gathered in this manner:
But if this is not possible, hold the stitches and this should not be stitched over. Then take a needle with thread in it and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust these threads equally between each other, and then with these raise your hand with an even lifting, raising all the skin over which the figure is drawn as we have described.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal whatever is inside that needs healing.
But if an abscess occurs, you should make your incision or opening, and then seal that abscess with a plaster similar to it, and with ointment.
And sometimes it is necessary for the eyelid to have its hairs turned inside out, then you should use water as we said of incision; but stitching on each one is more artificial.
To cauterize with reeds is done in this manner: And it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure inside according to what I have described; then by skill make two reeds or two thin splints, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width according to the width of the spatula. And you have already cut at the ends of each divided part where you have the threads.
Then add each one with skill over the excess of the eyelid of the eye, and bind the reeds of each divided part with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the skin through the tightness will die and fall off and sink until by itself it falls out.
If it is delayed, then break the fast with the tourniquets, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, once it has hardened, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not hurt (or sting).
And this is how to make two reeds according to this shape/method. and there should be the exact amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter .12.
About plucking stinging hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard (or stiff).
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and stinging in the eyes, then the operation is to take a fine needle and place it on that thread of fine silk and linen, and then you adjust the tips of it [the needle] and knot each one very finely. And let the length of the threads be about a palm in size.
And then you make another fine thread underneath it briefly, and tie the ends of that one if you want to.
And then have the patient place their head in your lap, and let it be near the light so that your work may be seen clearly, because it is a delicate and intricate operation.
And then quickly insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you pull it out above the natural line of the hair.
And then carefully pull the hair out from its root and insert that into a tweezer, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand along with it until the hair is removed by the tweezers from the eyelid, following the natural line of the hair.
But if the tweezers are pulled and the hair is not removed, pull the tweezers towards yourself with the thread that you have prepared for this purpose until it is removed from the upper orifice of the tweezers.
And check it with the eye's vision, for when you pull out the tweezers and the thread, and both are closed in the eye, leave the stitches for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and new skin grows over it.
And if the hair is too short, then attach a long natural hair to it and raise it with that one or let it be until it has lengthened enough in some space, and then you raise that one.
"Chapter XIII.
"About the care of and how to treat cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
"When cataract appears in the eye, and it is caused by the contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above, or to the right or left side due to poor healing from a wound or incision or cauterization, and it is called leporine cataract, whether this cataract is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor healing from wounds or incisions or cauterizations, or resembles their unfortunate state.
"The manner of the operation on it is that you should cut through that poor healing and separate its lips, and place between them a cloth soaked in oil, and bind them together until they are healed.
"And it is not appropriate to use for its treatment those things which dry or constrain, because if you do this, the cataract will return worse than before.
"Use for its treatment those things which soften, such as fenugreek, and boil it with water in which lentils and seeds of linseed are cooked, or make a plaster of diachylon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and dip the cloth into this, and use it for treatment.
And the treasure of your care is that you pierce with all ingenuity whatever is not solid according to the form as it was at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is only a certain correction of the halyxocratia, which does not restore the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the care for halyxocratia, which is done in the lower eyelid.
This halyxocratia that is done in the lower eyelid, which is truly called halyxocratia; and it is of two kinds: one natural, the other accidental.
But the accidental kind is caused by a blow, cut, or cautery, or similar things.
And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh on each side with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut widely with a broad spatula. And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take the reed and place it on the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the side of the lower eyelid.
Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
This is the Greek letter alpha (α).
And then cut off that piece of flesh to the extent of the length of his sharp blade below it, which is called the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; and then cure them with the water of mollifying medicines and hot compresses until they are healed.
And if the eyelid must be opened by incision, suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision along the edge of the eyelid, as previously described. And then separate with a hot compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary of the treatment for eyelid removal whether above or below, let it be performed according to the preparation of the eyelid form, and that is in the form of various spots.
And the skilled artisans always prepare an ingenious device in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or as close as possible to it, and the patient according to what is suitable for them from the operation and the instruments with the greatest convenience.
Chapter XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs to some men such that the eyelid is fixed above with the white of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you must insert the tip of a ray under the eyelid, lift it up, or extend it with honey.
Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp but slightly obtuse to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And let your cut always drain that adhesion until the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
Then put salt water in the eye with which you wash; or instill in it a solution of boric acid dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with linseed oil, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use adhesive bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
Concerning the ingrown nail and the flesh of the tear ducts.
You should know that nails come in two types: either they are nervous and resemble hard, subtle ice; or they are not nervous and resemble white, congealed humidity. When the latter touches iron, it must be taken with pincers, cut away, and the pincers should not be placed on it.
And both types of nails do not begin except in the larger tear duct, which little by little covers the sight and prevents light and eye movement.
But the way to operate for its ingrown is that the patient places his head on your lap, and then you open his eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with small-bladed pincers and extend it toward the sides above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend it toward the sides above, and scrape away the side of the nail that is near the pupil with the hair. And thus you should follow him with your hand into his rear.
And then you should incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and remove the natural tissue of the tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur due to this incision.
And sometimes the nail with the sole of one's finger or with a thread, as we have said, and then it should be cleansed with a fine spatula, which has this shape:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, put a little of crushed salt or sieved ashes into the eye, and let it stay overnight; then cleanse it with water until it is healed.
And if the nail is not inflamed and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in the fingernail, then many times this type of fingernail is cured with medications, and it heals as I have described in the previous section.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with a sharp edge like this: It seems like you want me to continue translating the text line by line as per your previous example. However, the provided sentence "am subtilitat" does not contain a verb or clear context, making it difficult to translate accurately without more information. Could you please provide the full paragraph or additional context for this sentence? And if you see that it is rarefied and hidden in that reason, then distill from your mouth into the hollow of the head with either cedar oil or rosemary oil or salt water, and close the hollow until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of that is removed from him, except if a contrary abscess forms in the hollow, for then you leave it, and treat the abscess first until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on him with reason until he is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if seen in the hollow due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and you cut that from that one piece, and do not finish the cutting so that you do not cut flows of tears.
Then distill rosemary oil and cedar oil into it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII
On the incision of the almond and of that which is born from flesh adhering to the hollow.
Here is the translation of the given text into English:
Based on the provided text and its translation, here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
And use your incision tool with which you cut those or use a spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or small scissors with which you can trim according to the shape that follows this chapter.
Therefore, once your incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt powder or drip onto it powdered vitriol, similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outside a cloth soaked in egg white until it is secured against pus.
And if there remains any suspicion of guardians and it is cauterized with blood, and you fear pus, then leave the wound open and treat that pus with water that causes the pus to cease, and then repeat over that area with an operation until it is healed. Similarly, proceed in the same way with the flesh that occurs in the wound of this kind.
However, you must avoid all treatment of the fresh wound by either natural or accidental means, especially with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is tolerating this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
"Of the collection of sand in the eye.
"The sand comes from veins that are stretched over the eye and prevent the eyelid's movement, thus causing the eye to swell for days.
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the eye in which there is sand is strong and has no other ailment than sand. If so, you should remove that sand.
"And it is that you instruct the patient to place their head on your lap. Then, suspend those veins with an ounce or two, according to your wisdom; and let that ounce be of fine double silk in this manner:
"or let there be two ounces gradually joined into one, like this:
"And then those veins should be carefully collected with fine forces, and gently draw the blood little by little, until you see that the veins are removed from the eye and have been turned back.
"And take care not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, be very steady in your work so that you only incise those veins.
"And when you have finished, then you should drop clear vinegar or rose water onto the eye, so that with its sharpness it may dissolve and remove what remains of the sand.
Here is the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And proceed with the treatment in the same manner until he is cured.
Here is the form of the forceps.
Chapter XIX
Of the reduction of hernias in the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine, if it is preceded by the narrative of them not being cured, then do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the abscess until its maturity is achieved, and extract all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And then, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you should scrape it with an instrument whose form is this:
It is named "rasp head" and should be made of iron, with a rounded head like an axe, which should be made pointed by filing or fine filing (as in the following form).
And place that [rasp] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent remedies.
Let's break down the sentence into its components and translate it line by line:
And if so, then it is not in his power to do anything but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you expose with either iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take three [pieces?] like this form.
Let the extremity of it be made triangular, and its shaft be first thinned to the extremity in this manner as you see thus.
Then place that [triangular extremity] over the bone, and it should be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little toward the cheek, and then turn your hand with the three [pieces?] into it until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient will feel this as something comes out when you take your hand away.
Therefore, at that point restore the area with astringent medicines to dry it as you have been shown.
Therefore, when the flesh and area have healed, then the matter that was spreading to other parts outside returns to the nose, so this is easier for the patient.
Chapter 20
On the reduction of the swelling of the cheek
When the cheek swells to its full extent and no injury or diminution occurs in the vision, then you should let the patient lie down, and follow him, and place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification, and suck well; and then place on the cheek a liniment that is made from acacia and aloe and sesame seed oil and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the cheek with many powders.
The method for creating poultices is as follows: take strips of linen cloth and fold each strip into four layers, then make them into packages (or bundles).
Then place one bundle on top of the other according to the amount of swelling that is present. Then press firmly on the bundles with a strong, thick cloth; and apply the cupping glasses with suction without making incisions; then remove the cups and let the swelling subside day and night.
But if during this time the ligament has softened, it should be very tight.
And then remove the ligature day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the poultices with the bundles and the ligature and the cups until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the incision of the elevated part of the choroid.
When there is a rupture in the choroid and it protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of a man, if you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: insert one needle from below into the base of the choroid, and another from above into the lacrimal part; make the upper needle penetrate and leave the lower needle in place according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the protruding part of the choroid around the needle, and press it firmly.
And then extract the needle and place over the wound a cloth soaked in egg white, and let it stay until the thread enters with the skin.
And then cure the wound with water that will comfort it until the injury is healed.
And sometimes apply throughout with a circular cloth over the wound, making a large mound, and then perforate it with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, allowing the moisture to drain out, and then descending the swelling and re-entering promptly.
And then strengthen [the area] until it is healed.
Chapter .22
On the treatment of cataracts.
This disease called cataract is not anything but a thin membrane that is placed in the wound like descending water, and it is not that.
But the way to treat it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you see the thin membrane approaching the edges, and then dry it out so that it does not descend, and stop the light, and the patient will see the causes just as they were seen.
And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
And if the descent is not prepared with water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and immediately take a thin spatula and apply it over the skin next to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunica in the crown (in the appropriate place), until the humors are expelled.
Therefore, when it is expelled, then pour hot water into the nostril in which you have mixed honey or in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And immediately treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 22
On the treatment of water coming out of the nostril.
As we have said in the division, there are different types of water and which one is suitable for piercing with a needle, as will be declared. Therefore, according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his nose tightly.
And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected nostril if the water is in the left nostril; or with your right hand if it is in the right nostril.
"And then with your right hand take almagda, if the wound is on the left; or with your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
"And then place the tip of almagda near the crown for the thickness of the hair in the wound, and then peel off almagda with virtue and roll your hand with it.
"And then penetrate into the wound and feel that almagda has already arrived at its intended location.
"And it should be that the measure of the path of almagda to the stone is equal to the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea.
"And then place almagda in the location where there is water, and then you throw it down once, or twice, and if the water descends quickly, then have the patient look at that upon which he restores his vision quickly, and almagda in its hole.
"And then wait a little while; and if the water has descended, then you place that other time before almagda is thrown out.
Sure, let's translate the provided text line by line:
But we and those of our time pause upon that which is called triac in Latin with egg white.
And if you do not obey your doctor in the treatment of the eye due to its hardness — for there are some men whose eyes are very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the ointment called albedo, which has this form:
And therefore pierce that joint with it, and do not put your hand into the hole, but only make a way for the doctor's subtle touch.
Then immediately intervene as we have said.
And you must complete your work by preparing a quiet sleeping place for the patient, where they can sleep on their back in a dark room. All movement should be forbidden.
And let the patient's nature remain undisturbed so that their condition may improve, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
And let the bandage be applied according to its disposition for three days.
And then uncover the patient in that dark room and test their vision by showing them some objects. Then return the bandage for seven days.
It is not necessary to do this during the hour of the cure, or immediately after the injection. "You must remove this because water can easily be moved by a strong and powerful gaze.
"But if you encounter an abscess, it is necessary to open the head of the abscess before the seventh day, and then irrigate it with water that reduces swelling.
"Then you should close the patient's eyes and place a cloth over their face to help regulate their vision for several days, keeping them in a dark room.
"And then gradually lead the patient out of that darkness and have them converse about their causes.
"And know that in the operation, the student is not exempt from some vision, so you should be confident about the operation.
"And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and one said that they made fire in the Airac area with a needle through which water was drawn.
"However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it written about in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
"And these are the types of needles that should be used for those who do not know about them:
And they should be made of iron or steel properly, and their tips should have this subtle triangular shape, with the pointed end like this is the shape.
Chapter .24
About the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born various growths of flesh, one of which is caused by a stinging motive similar to that of scorpion bites or polyps; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles that fish. And its flesh is cancerous, scaly, of dark color; and it is the flesh of a lion, not of dark color.
Therefore, in the case of this flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick your finger in those fleshes. Then extract that from the outside parts, and then cut what you have understood of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part into another until you know that all the flesh has already been removed; because if any remains of it for some reason by which excision is possible, then you should scrape it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing remains of it. Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then place some grease and water or wine in the nose. But if the nose is open and moisture enters the palate, then know that he is already cured.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh rotting in the upper part of the nose bones to which the corruption has not yet reached.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into him, which has some thickness, and place in it as many wicks as possible, and put between each wick the quantity of a finger or less, and have the patient lie down and insert one end of the wick into the nose with a reed or another means that is available to him.
And after doing this, let him blow his breath so that it reaches the nasal passages and comes out through his throat, because many times children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for those who wish to perform it.
Then place the two ends of the wick, one end sticking out from the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a meat clamp with the wicks that are in the wick, and do this until you know that the meat is already with the wicks of the wick.
And immediately extract the bile, and place a cupping glass on the nose to draw out the blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is softened of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if the course of treatment requires drying, use that one.
And this is the design of the instrument used by the master purger to distill oils and medicines into the nose:
And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open lamp with a small cup, and the opening likewise.
And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a reed, and the nozzle of the master purger's instrument should be flat and open; on the back of it there should be a handle with which you can hold it when you pour oil or water into it from the juices and suckable causes.
Chapter XXV
About warts that are born in the extremities of the nose.
It is often seen that warts are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is said that on certain days, when the moon is in a specific position, one should pay attention to them.
And for this reason, you must observe it at the beginning of its appearance and record everything about it. Then place on the area either a cautery or a medicine that burns in the same location.
However, if you observe it too late after it has grown, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, dark in color and painless. If so, do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess; for often those who observe this abscess suffer great harm from it. iety
And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not dark in color, and it is possible to observe it in all cases, then evacuate the patient and observe it without fear, and treat the area with a drying and constricting agent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI
On the suture of the nose and lips, and the earlobe when continuity is broken by wound or injury.
"Know that when there is a break in continuity of one of these ligaments, few people are helped by this operation.
"Therefore, when someone has any of those causes, consider if it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then you should join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then cure it until it is healed.
"And if the lips of the broken continuity are already separated, and each is healthy, then you should scrape off each part of its cord until blood comes out. "Then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and trass on top of them, and place on the powder a thin paste of emplaster or any other of the consolidating pastes, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and let it lie until the threads are dissolved by themselves, and then cure with ointment until it is healed.
"But the manner of suturing is that you either bring together the break in continuity with needles as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen, or bring together the break in continuity with thread as has been taught to you.
Chapter 27.
On the causes that come in the two lips on the inside parts.
Many times men see in the inside parts of their lips some hard swellings similar to goose fat, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips and folds each of those hard parts, and then absolve the area with crushed sage until the blood has been drawn out, and then wash with vinegar and cure the area with water that is astringent until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of hardened flesh on the gums.
Very often people see hardened flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or whatever you have with your scissors and incise it to its root, and let the pus run out or the blood.
And then place on the area crushed sage or other astringent or absorbent powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
**Chapter 29**
About toothache with fever.
When the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and out, and between the gums are filled with rough, hard, sometimes dark scales that turn yellow or green, and corruption comes to the gums through these, then the teeth become loose.
And so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place his head on your chest, then scrape the teeth where these scales appear with a tool resembling sand until none of their causes remain, which will remove the blackness and yellowness and other problems until they are cleaned.
If this removes what was at the beginning of the ailment, that is good; if not, then you repeat the treatment on those teeth on the second day and the third and the fourth until it reaches its final conclusion as you wish.
And know that teeth require many scrapers of various shapes and forms according to how your operation is prepared. And for this reason, the scraper with which the inside part of the tooth is scraped is different from the scraper used between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of scrapers you must prepare as you will see shortly:
Certainly! Please provide me with the first line from the medieval medical treatise that you would like translated into English.
"On the extraction of teeth.
"Be sure to cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay the extraction as much as possible, because there is no substitute for it once it has been removed, since it is a vital substance until the time of its removal.
"However, when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he believes it to be in a healthy tooth. And if you extract that one, then the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this happen through the operations of fools.
"Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and afterwards rinse it with the aforementioned substances, or with fine forceps little by little at the beginning until you have loosened it.
"And then place strong pliers in his mouth for good speech or powerful extraction, and position the patient's head between your legs so that you have a firm grip and it does not slip out. Then draw the tooth with straight movements so that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that it can be easily and forcefully removed from them as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must fill that cavity with cloth and secure it with a thin thread to prevent it from breaking during your manipulation with tongs.
And it is necessary that you work very carefully with scarification around the entire edge of the gum and be careful not to break or damage it, and return to the patient because the pain will be worse than before.
And beware of doing what some ignorant barbers do in their ignorance and audacity regarding tooth extraction, without administering the remedies we have recommended; for many times they bring upon sick men great evils which are more difficult to heal, and all or some of their roots, or that you extract it along with some bones from the jaw as has happened many times.
And after the tooth is extracted, rinse the mouth with hot water or vinegar with salt.
And if there should be blood flow through this, similar to numerous views, then take some amount of egg and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not work, cauterize.
And the shape of the forceps and fine pincers with which you begin to extract the tooth should be of a long handle, short shaft, and thick, so that they are not bent when you need to use them.
And in this way, with a thick handle until they are not bent when tightened, they should have a short tip.
And they should be made of Indian iron with straight tips, and at the ends of these there should be teeth that interlock with each other and hold firmly by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, which is wide, and they have strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from fractured jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken, there are some reasons for this. Then you should place a cotton pad with border over the area for one day or two until the area becomes soft; and then introduce tweezers or pincers, the tips of which resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or spoonbill, in the shape of forceps:
Based on the context of a medieval medical treatise and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And if the patient does not obediently present with these forceps or clamps, then it is necessary for you to cut through the anus and strip away all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small pincer of this form:
And it should be of short length, rather thick, and not pointed to prevent tearing.
Therefore, if the anus is thus pierced, it is good; but if not, assist yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: The form of the first instrument is a triangular tip with some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is to have a triangular and more delicate tip.
And already assisted with this instrument, which has two branches like this: and with other instruments which I will describe later for the extraction of teeth; because first it is done with this instrument which resembles a large thorn, and this is its form:
With a twisted or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not pointed to prevent tearing.
And know that the tooth extraction instruments are similar in shape and function to other instruments.
This sentence seems to discuss the skill and knowledge of medical practitioners in diagnosing and treating various ailments that ancient physicians may not have specifically addressed or treated with particular instruments. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's my translation of the given text:
And if there is any swelling in the patient, reduce it little by little, and hold it with your mouth to prevent it from spreading or escaping until the entire bone is healed; then restore the area with suitable medicine for this purpose.
And if there is a small sore on the bone, then scrape off that sore and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
This indicates that the text is divided into sections or chapters, with this being the 32nd chapter. The word "Capitol" in this context is likely a typo or variation of the more common term "Chapter".
Chapter 32: On the care of protruding teeth.
When teeth protrude from the body unnaturally due to their shape, and especially when this occurs in women, particularly elderly venerable ones, you should consider: if one tooth is very close to another and cannot be extracted or straightened, then file it down; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose form is like a pig's snout, and it should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp point.
And your cutting should be done with the instrument with which you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
"And if there is an eminent tooth that needs filing down, then file it with an Indian steel file, which looks like this.
"And let all of it be made of Indian steel; and it should have many small points like a file used for making needles. With this, the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with gentleness, so that no other tooth is damaged or lost. "Then polish it at the end, and rinse it with hot water.
"And if it is a tooth from which part of the surface has broken off and the tongue is touching it, then you should file that area until the roughness of that part is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not touch it and speech is not impaired.
Chapter 33
"On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filling.
"When the front teeth have been dislodged or displaced by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then to prevent them from falling out, insert gold fillings into those teeth. Do not use silver, because silver turns black and softens over time, but gold never changes.
Sure, here's the translation of the given sentence: And then proceed with the suturing inside the area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not weakened.
And be sure that the thread with which you reinforce the stitches must pass between the teeth so that they do not become loose.
And then cut off the excess thread with scissors or forceps, and gather those ends in each place with skill, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue. And then let it lie thus tightly as it should be.
However, if it is loosened or broken, reinforce that or those with another thread in the same manner at all times.
And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the suture of two healthy teeth and two broken teeth, as you see these tied together.
And when one or two teeth are returned to their place, then make each of them fit well in their respective locations, and let them grow as we have said, so that they may strengthen.
And do not do this except with good craftsmanship and skill.
And sometimes a cause related to the bones of a cow is used, and it is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
About the cause of the lesion that occurs on the tongue and prevents speech.
This lesion that occurs under the tongue sometimes is natural with which one is born, or it may be accidental and occur due to a healed wound.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head fixed to your side; and raise his tongue, and then carefully cut that nerve lesion as much as necessary until the tongue is released from its stiffness.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you should apply oil and cut it as much as necessary until you have completely severed the lesion and the knot has been dissolved.
And be careful not to make a fissure in the thickness of the flesh, and that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
Sure! Here's the translation of the given text: And then that care with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess resembling a small tumor forms under the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally; and it quickly grows until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is black or dark in color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it has a whitish color, indicating moisture, then you insert the scalpel into it and cut it with a fine spatula, cutting it from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you place a cloth soaked in vinegar on top, which is vitriol, to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have removed it completely, until it has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
This seems to be indicating that we are starting Chapter 36 of the treatise. Without more context, it's difficult to provide a line-by-line translation as there is only one sentence here. However, based on the pattern seen in the previous text, "Capitol .xxxvi." likely means "Chapter 36" or "Section 36".
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
When swelling occurs in the throat glands, which resemble cotton and appear externally, these are called tonsils. If you treat them with the water we mentioned in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, and causes little pain. In that case, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, do not touch it with iron because of the blood flow; rather, let it mature inside first. Then either you will pierce it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already subsided from the cautery with complete rest or if it has diminished somewhat; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant taking between his hands presses the tongue downwards with a very noble instrument, of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate this sentence: And if something is causing inflammation of the tissues, then proceed with an instrument that looks like this:
And if something is causing inflammation of the tissues, then proceed with an instrument that looks like this: and it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each is in the inside of the other, very sharp, and made of iron that has been hardened.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then proceed with a spatula that looks like this: and let one end be sharp while the other is not.
And after you have made an incision on one side, make another incision on the other side in the same manner, and then the patient will be healed of cold water.
But if there is bleeding, heal with water from the decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves and similar to that of hemostatic causes until the bleeding has stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes this occurs in the groin area, other times in the form of abscesses or both ears, and cut them in the same way as I have said for the incision of two holes.
Based on the given text and patterns, here's my translation of the sentence:
"And the abscess had grown so large that after two months it would burst through two openings.
"So I punctured it carefully and inserted one of their needles into the opening, and pulled out some of that large amount of pus. Then I incised that area where the other opening was located, and closed his mouth, pressed his tongue, and then I inserted another needle into that abscess.
"And then I incised a large part of it, and there was only a little blood coming out from it. "So it is certain that this woman is cured, and she immediately began to drink water, and then eat food. Because I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess formed in place of the first one, which was incised until it extended.
"So I applied ointment and cauterized the wound, and after that it healed; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done for this patient.
Chapter .xxxvii.
About incising an umbilical hernia when it is abscessed.
When they say catarrh is present in the uvula, and it is persistent and prolonged, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is located in the throat, large and round, then it is called a bubble.
But when it is treated with the water we mentioned earlier in the division, and your treatment does not help, and likewise if the abscess has already been removed from him and is subtle, then you should insert that which is round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and it is not at all painful, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in this there is danger for the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit up and press his tongue with the instrument that suits this form, and then place the nail on the gum, and pull it down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molars.
And you must not incise it unless it is adjusted on the natural limit without addition, because if you incise more than that, you will impede his speech.
And then, at the incision, use what we have recommended in the treatment of two ailments, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you must use ingenuity in cauterizing them without fear. The manner of cauterization should only be with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier, and then take some of the water we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and make a living wound with it. Place it not too thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument, which has this form:
Let the patient's mouth be in a state of concavity where the medicine is placed, like the concavity of a spoon. Place the instrument with the medicine on the lips, and have the patient spit out over their own chest so that any saliva or mucus from that mouth does not escape onto the throat and cause burning.
Then take your hand with the medicine and press it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has become darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
Based on the given context and the language similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the sentence line by line:
Sure, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
And this type of treatment is more secure than caution and longer lasting.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more delicate than cautery and incision, because it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried arabic dates, camomile, and similar herbs, and prepare all these ingredients or some of them in an earthenware pot. They should be soaked in vinegar, then boiled; and the pot should be well-stoppered with a proper stopper, with a hole in the middle of the pot over which an appropriate concave instrument of silver or iron is placed.
And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula through the hole, until the uvula is very much darkened.
And repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, for it may cause too much swelling in the abscess, and you should not do this unless you are certain that there is no abscess present.
If the instrument is not present with you, then take a reed and attach to its end a piece of eggshell, so that the patient's mouth may be covered, because the shell of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38
Of the extraction of thorns and water that stick in the throat and other causes.
Many small seeds stick in the throat, or a thorn from a pea, or any other cause.
Then it is necessary for you to extract that which is visible from those things, on which the sight falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
And that which is not apparent and hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make the patient vomit before the food has descended into the stomach, because the cause connected to the throat will be expelled by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of onion or radish of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and bind it very strongly with honey, and then let the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be expelled. And take an eel and have it bound with a thread, and let it be inside the meal, and afterward it should be extracted; or take a leek and put it inside the meal, and afterward remove it.
And if those causes which we mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
And it should be a bit thicker than a small ray (fish), and at its end there should be a cavity into which you can easily insert the patient's tongue.
And let the patient have their head raised up, and be careful that the touch of their throat bone does not cause them discomfort or that it pulls out a bone or spine, or that the doctor with his hand causes an injury.
However, it is better that the patient who is being treated enters the instrument themselves, due to their knowledge of the location and cause, and that they push down and pull up the hand with the instrument until everything prepared inside is forgotten.
Chapter 39
On the removal of leeches attached to the throat.
When treating a leech with the methods mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and not with cauterization, look then at the patient's throat under the light, after you have pressed their tongue with the instrument that we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see a leech, remove it with a small onyx or a delicate fine instrument.
And if it is not possible to remove the leech with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's vein, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech dies and leaves the vein) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
Then take a bowl full of cold water and open the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any reason cause you to drink from that and stir the water for an hour with your hand, because the leech dies as soon as it feels the water.
But if it has not been removed with the water we recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument we recommended for uvula fumigation.
Do this, whether it works or not.
Another method of operation in fumigation is this: you take a container in which there are burning coals and the container is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument is placed in that hole; then put the fumigation above; and let the patient place their mouth on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will fall off immediately.
And if it does not improve, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure the patient abstains from drinking, but instead eats salty and raw foods, and does not drink water. This treatment is necessary to ensure the condition is forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to draw blood from the gouty area when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see them, except that there is some curvature in it. which should be placed on the gouty area, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork, which is rounded, in which there are ridges made by a file, so that when any obstacle is encountered, it does not slip.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the speech on the opening of abscesses and their sectioning.
Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, as will be remembered later, each of which is described in this book.
And they are different in their opening and sectioning in two ways, one of which is according to the kind of abscess itself; and the other according to the humors that we find within them.
And the second manner is specific to the places where it occurs in the body, because the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy area is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment according to their location.
And moreover, there are some abscesses that should not be perforated until the pus within them has matured or their contents have become solid.
Some abscesses should be opened when they are still fresh and not fully matured, such as those located near the joints, for an abscess close to a joint can prolong its existence until it spreads into the surrounding area, causing the ligaments or nerves of that joint to become severely corrupted. This can lead to contraction of that limb; or it may be an abscess near a main organ, and if you delay perforating it until it is fully matured, it could cause damage to the main organ; or it may be near the buttocks, in which case you should not perforate it when it is still crude and not fully digested, except for those located near the buttocks, so that its pus does not spread and extend to the inner parts of the buttocks, creating a fistula, or so that something may be done at its border that cannot heal. But you should know the time of the pus-filled abscess puncture, and that is when it has ripened.
And know that it is ripened when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
And because you should know that the puncture should be done in the lower part of the abscess, and from there will come the pus as a result of the treatment.
And the puncture should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, cords of the nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture of it until its digestion is confirmed according to what we have said; because if you puncture before that, the body of the pus and a lot of filth will be prolonged, and will greatly harden the lips of it and its depth.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And it is necessary that you administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses a large and wide incision or multiple cuts, according to the varying size of the abscesses.
And there are other types of abscesses in which it is necessary that the scoop be concave and incised, when it is done this way like a bread roll and it is done at a time when it already stinks, as happens with cases of carbuncles and buboes.
And of these are those that are incised with a cut having three angles; and among them is the one in which it is incised as if with a figure of myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the tonsils.
And among them are those in which a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut are administered, similar to these.
But the one in which there is no head as in these superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture it with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you puncture it and do not worry about extracting all of the matter at once; having extracted a portion from it, close the abscess again the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and repeat this several times according to the degree until it is completely emptied.
Sure, I'll give it a try:
Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line interpretation of the provided sentence:
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding repeatedly.
But if the bleeding persists, it is necessary that you administer remedies and powders which have been recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you should soak powders in vinegar and hot oil, and place them on the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or vinegar and oil on them, and all of this should be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to it a cure that is suitable for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure particularly by chapters.
It seems like you're referring to a medieval medical treatise with a title or chapter number in Roman numerals. The phrase "Capitol .xli." translates to "Chapter 41" or "Section 41". This indicates that the text is divided into sections or chapters, and this is the 41st one. Without additional context or sentences, I can't provide a more detailed translation, but this should give you an idea of how to approach translating similar texts. If you have the content of Chapter 41, I'd be happy to help translate it line by line as well.
About the incision of abscesses that appear on the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and these are a type of node that contains sheaths within them; and their species are moving.
And they emit pus, and those [abscesses] contain moisture similar to linseed. And there are those [abscesses] that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and there are also those that are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all [types], and in the removal of them there is no fear, since their removal does not cause counteraction with archery.
And the operation in the incision of these is that you probe them with an instrument shaped like this one, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
Because if what it contains is moisture, then incise it with an incision according to its length along the surface in this manner:
And start at the incision from the line of B to the line of G. Once the moisture is evacuated, then you cauterize that area which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause remaining, for if too much remains it returns, so nothing should remain from that.
Then you submerge the area in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with it and leave it there for another day, because with water you will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
Then you repeat the process on that area with Egyptian ointment, second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that no trace of that membrane remains; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodules, then you should incise it in this manner: with an incision in the shape of a cross, and place the concave side between two lips of the incision and scrape it from all sides, and use your strength to extract the membrane that contains it.
But if your bow resists, then do as I have previously told you.
And similarly, do the same for the abscess that has turned into stone in both cutting and curing, as we have told you; and cutting over a stoned abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are such abscesses that are in the head of some men who have no moisture at all; the cause of which is that I once made an incision over an abscess in the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a dry, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced. If someone were struck with it, they would suffer.
But in other cases of abscesses in the head that are not like this one, such as those that come to the heads of children and go into the roots of the ears, you should make an incision over these, but let it be a superficial incision for all of them.
And make the puncture of those in their lower part so that the body is relieved of pus at its lower parts.
Then cure them with water suitable for this purpose.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
This text appears to be discussing the appearance of certain growths or tumors in various parts of the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And so those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofula are nodules, for among them some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see is of good disposition in the touch, whose color is close to that of the kite, and is increased all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preceded, it is necessary for you to cut this with a superficial incision from above the part below the body along the line from G to B. And scrape that away entirely, and extend the lips of the kite with an ounce or with small onces if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And if the spatula is not very sharp, do not adjust it with your hand, as this may disturb the patient and you might cut something that does not need to be cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, you would be prevented from continuing your operation. Then press on the wound with crushed vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, tighten the wound, and let what is inside heal itself until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to suppurate. When the blood is cut (or severed).
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger whether there is any other cause of the remaining small scrofulas; if so, cut them and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the large scrofula, it is better not to cut that scrofula from its root. Instead, it is better to leave it with a strong double bandage and let it fall off by itself without harming the patient.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it (i.e., bandage it).
And if you cut out that entire wart, then it is necessary for you to join together the two lips of the wound and stitch them up immediately so that there remains no excess tissue.
But if you see that there remains excess tissue due to the size of the wart, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut out the root of it, extract it, and apply stitches as mentioned before.
And as for the warts that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow puncture where you see the mature part of it, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus flows out from below, as we have said.
Then apply an ointment similar to the above-mentioned ones to the puncture, so that it dissolves whatever remains of the corruption. Then when you see that the wound is already clean, at that time you should treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII
Of the incision of the pus pocket in the armpit.
The ancients said that this incision should be done in the pus pocket, but I have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
"And this is the record of those words.
"But in men with scrotal hernias, it is necessary to avoid the removal of the testicle, as it cannot be done properly because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are here.
"But in those who have an abscess caught in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the testicle, it is necessary to use the section of the testicle to avoid the loss that occurs from perforation.
"Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the testicle below three or four small circles of the testicular circles, with a small section in the middle between two circles for quantity. The section should be done in the cicatrix, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are few.
"And if the physician is cowardly, he should then extend the throat with an ounce of oil, and immediately cut the throat until it reaches the trachea. However, he should avoid the blood vessels if any of those are encountered.
"Then incise the lips as we have described, and it is indicated for the section of the trachea for the flaccidity which is from that exit with what is broken and by the absence of voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
And when the hour has passed in which the piercing was feared, add two lips of the skin of the wound and suture it alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Zahrawi said that the summary of the speech we have reported is nothing more than to see that some of these abscesses have already drained the pus from the patient and the patient has come close to death, and his soul is departed, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the place of the wound for some breaths, and be saved from death. ︎
And for this he commanded to let the wound remain open until the evil of the sickness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then he commanded to suture the wound and heal it until it is cured.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, cutting off part of the trachea; and I was called to her treatment, and found the woman just like someone who is dying, and discovered the wound and found blood coming out of the wound in small amounts.
Here's my best attempt at translating the sentence into English:
And do not approach the servant unless she speaks with a hoarse voice, and after some days she will return to her usual state of health.
And now I say to you that in the treatment of epilepsy there is nothing to fear.
Chapter .44
Of the treatment of an abscess that occurs on the neck outside and is called a hernia of the neck.
This abscess named a hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural way, it is not possible to cure it.
And the accidental way is in two forms: one is similar to large knots, and the other form is similar to an abscess caused by a blockage of an artery, and in that case there is danger. And it should not be presumed to cauterize it except in the case where it is small. And you should approach that and examine it with the said instrument, and if you find it similar to large knots, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like knots, and extract it with water that contains pearl barley; but if not, then its entire being must be investigated, and afterward heal the place with healing water until it is healed.
Sure, let's try translating this line by line into English:
"About the incision of the types of nodes.
"There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
"And it is fitting that I also explain the difference between a node and an excrescence when there is doubt.
"Therefore, I say that an excrescence is characterized by heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess fluid subsides; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
"But a node is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain; it is like that which is found in the proper place.
"And it is according to the color of the body; its beginning is like a grain and it is made thus as a cyst, either larger or smaller, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you should investigate it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called a probe, as will be explained in the chapter that follows.
"And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part that you find in the abscess; and you will turn the aforementioned parts little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
Based on the context and the pattern of the previous translations, here's a possible translation:
And if watery discharge has been forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise with a shallow cut according to what I have said in other cases.
And if there is no moisture from the discharge, know that it is greasy.
Dry it with a dry cut, having the shape of a cross in this manner: Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a hook, and carefully skin the rope from all parts, and save the fur or bag, if possible, on that, and draw out that corruption with a noose.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens this way, and then you should extract it by force until nothing remains from it.
Because if any cause remains, little or a lot, the knot will return according to the greatest amount.
And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place on it a cautery as in the case of an abscess, and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it and treat it with astringent water.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
I apologize, but it seems that you haven't provided the next line of the text for translation. Please provide the next line so that I can continue with the translation.
About the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of these, there are three types of instruments: a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, with sharpened points, so that they fit well into the openings.
And these are the forms of the probes, which are called albedo, and one of them is called veriga.
And there are three types: a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The form of the large probe is as follows:
The form of the medium-sized probe is as follows:
The form of the small probe is this:
It is necessary that they be used for openings, exits, fistulas and abscesses, which are caused by bones or other reasons.
And they are made rounded, large, long, like big needles with which the skins are sewn together, and they are made of citron wood or wood or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
And the experiment with black feathers is done, which indicates that through them the fistulas in the cavities they reflect should be opened, and they should be reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three types of them, some are long, others medium, and others short, depending on the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
"Form of the great experiment with lead:
"Form of the medium experiment with lead:
"Form of the small experiment with lead:
The forms of the needles are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and there are three types: long, short, and medium-sized.
And they are hollow, and there are three types.
And some of them have two curves, and there are three kinds.
And they have three curves, and there are three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
"Form of a small simple needle, its form:
This appears to be discussing the "form of large blisters having two curves." Here's a possible translation: Form of anointing oil having two curves: Shape of some ointment that has two curves.
Shape of great ointment which has three curves.
The form of anointing oil having three curves.
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three types: great, medium, and small.
The form of a large scalpel:
The shape of the medium scalpel:
The shape of the small scalpel.
The tips of these (scalpels) with which the incision is made are sharp and the other tips are not sharp, and they are not positioned in such a way that during the scraping of the nodes there is fear of incising a vein or nerve, and through these, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility for a while due to the heat that follows the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of cupping glasses, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Here's a possible translation for the sentence:
E si en la extremidad lateral se ha hecho una punción con un espátula escondida y en ella corre la sangre hacia dentro y hacia fuera, cuando lo desees, hazlo así como las veces anteriores.
"Los espacios, que son escondidos entre las mencionadas [partes del cuerpo], permiten la perforación de los abscesos y no dañan a los enfermos, y hay tres tipos: grande, mediano y pequeño. "Estas son las formas de esos [espacios]:
"Las formas de las ventosas con las que se corta el flujo de la sangre son de tres tipos: grandes, medianas y pequeñas. Las formas de ellas son:
"Deben estar hechas de metal, redondas y con cierta longitud, y deben ser delgadas.
"Y es necesario que estos tres tipos de ventosas (grandes, medianas y pequeñas) se utilicen para cortar rápidamente el flujo de sangre en casos de emergencia, y cuando primero no sea necesaria la medicina.
"Sin embargo, no uses esas para cortar la sangre en cualquier parte del cuerpo; úsalo solo en áreas de carne, como en los muslos de las piernas y las caderas, y en los músculos de los brazos, pechos y abdomen, así como en los muslos carnosos de las piernas.
And sometimes these instruments are made from small scraps resembling surgical scissors according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or an artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII
Of the care for men's breasts, which resemble women's.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen at the beginning of sleep, and then the breasts are swollen, resembling women's breasts, and they hang down, like pendulums.
And for the one who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those [breasts] with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G. Then drain all the pus and fill the wound with an encarnative medicament, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the breast sinks downward and becomes soft due to its size, just as it should in women, then it should be cut into two halves above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which is contained within the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then drain the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and let it sit until it has corroded through the flesh, and then treat the area that has been healed.
Chapter .48.
Concerning the perforation of abscesses that come under the nipple.
These abscesses that form under the nipple are of the kind called scrofulous, hard, and contain a bag of pus.
And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated through the incision, then fill it with old cloth and let it sit overnight.
Then remove the cloth and treat the area with appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is of the kind that forms nodes or scrofula, then incise it in the same manner as we have said concerning the section on scrofula likewise.
If the wound is spread such that it causes rotting, then administer on him cautery as we have said before.
Chapter .49.
About the incision of abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
When the arrow is broken and the cord attached to it has hardened, an abscess often occurs. And the signs by which one knows that inflammation or abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, it is long in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound in him.
And that which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the surface of the body.
And incision on this abscess is harmful, especially in those below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
But on that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, make a section in the cord in the length; and then widen the section with hooks near the arrow, and free the tunic until it is exposed.
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And then puncture the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood drains out and the abscess is resolved.
And then apply a treatment to the location where the pus is generated, until the ligaments fall off; and then treat that with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a dry vein, then you should hold water as close as possible to the abscess with a cord; and then insert the needle where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the grape ligature of two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a horsehair with that needle throughout all of the abscess after the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part until what is inside it comes out, then you will cut the excess of the cord and let what is tied to it go.
And then place on the wound the cloth you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with lime and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and in the vein, and likewise an abscess can occur in the nerves when it occurs due to their pulsation or from excessive work, and similarly.
And it is most commonly found in the areas of the auxiliary or ankle joints, or in any place where the joints are more prominent.
And it is a serious abscess, and its appearance resembles that of the rest of the body, and when it is close to its end and becomes very tense, the patient feels something like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that grows in the belly of the body, and therefore the colon is left out, and it is prominent at all times and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, for those that are in the joints, it is unnecessary to seal them with iron, because it will quickly lead to contraction.
"But if it is in the head or forehead, remove it with a spoon. "But if the swelling is small, then cut that off with scissors and excise it from the root.
"And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and incise that, and then remove that; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
"Chapter II
"On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek and also on the belly.
"There are some wounds in the bellies of many men and in other parts of their bodies which are called funguses because they resemble fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and already their lips have turned black, and it is one of the lesser ones, and it is very significant.
"And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two such growths that resembled fungi even more, and there was no difference between them except that they were small.
"And the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and a moisture ran from them constantly.
"So I incised those and found in one eighteen ticks, and in the other six ticks.
And the operation in their incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of their humors is white, moist, and of a subtle nature; then you cut them with a broad spatula, and in your presence, there are cauteries on fire, for many times you must expel much blood from them; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize that area.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful, beware of incising with iron; rather, take freshly made lead plaster, and strengthen that humor with it, using the manner we have said; and let it sit for two days.
And then adjust in the tightness of the lead thread; thus, do not cease strengthening the large amount of lead in it until it is cut and falls by itself without effort.
But if the humor is of a coarse nature, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you incise most of it, and then cauterize that area to prevent its return.
And then care for the patient until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to cut into that which is of dark color, has little feeling, and has irregular edges, for that is also like cancer.
And I come to mind with the memory of crab near this.
Chapter 52.
On the care for the prominence of the navel.
The prominence of the navel is caused by several reasons; either by fissures in the cipher which is on the belly, and from it comes out the tissue or intestines as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously stated, or by confined gas.
But if it is by a fissure in the cipher and by the issuing of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and it is without pain, and appears in various places. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance with that which we have mentioned is of more violent diversity, and when you press on it as we said, it hides, and then returns; and it is very light with it, and it is greatly magnified by much bathing and hard work.
Based on the pattern and context of the provided translation, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And if it is due to blood, then at that time appear the blackish pustule.
But if it is caused by flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it feels like a mass of varying size.
But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it makes one roar with pain.
And the treatment for it is that you should consider whether the swelling of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein issue, or flatulence; if so, you must refrain from treating it, because in such cases there is danger and fear, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arrow wounds and veins.
And if the swelling of the navel is due to intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to lie on their side and be fully extended; and then sign with a probe around the entire navel, and then instruct them to turn onto their back between your hands on their belly; and then surround the area of the navel where you probed with lard; and then gently extend the majority of the abscess towards the upper part with a large hook; and then bind it tightly in the area with strong thread or silk, using the proper method for binding.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if you have found the cloth, then take it with oil; and cut away the excess parts of him.
But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then circle around that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and put into them two strong threads, and insert two needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you should make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open until the flesh swells and falls out by itself; or cut that part when it has thinned and fallen, and then treat it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is full of flesh or due to moisture, then you should remove the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture found in it, and then treat that place with water that suits and solidifies the area.
Chapter 53.
On the care of the crab.
As we have said in the division, about the type of crab and in what way it is treated with medicines, and that a knife should be avoided in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken about crabs generated in the womb and the caution of their treatment.  This sentence seems to be discussing the topic of treating genital warts (crabs) using medicinal methods instead of surgical ones, and emphasizing the need for careful treatment to prevent further complications.
And the ancients said that in some cases, cancer is located in places where it can be eradicated, such as breast cancer or testicular cancer, and it should be removed along with its resemblances to other members, especially when it starts small.
But when it is advanced and large, one should not approach it, for I know of no cure for such cases, nor have I seen another or heard of its occurrence.
And the operation for it, as we have said, is to precede and let the patient purge with black bile some times, and then bleed him if an evident swelling is found.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for the operation, and then cauterize in the wound those places that are necessary; and then remove from all sides with good purging until there is no cause left for its return. Allow the blood to flow and do not stop it too quickly; press on the areas and wipe away the thick blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument that you have among the instruments.
But if you encounter resistance to the thick blood due to veins or arteries, then cauterize it until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure or condition. Here’s a line-by-line translation attempt:
"About the treatment of diabetics.
"We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of diabetes due to water and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medicine.
"And that which is treated with iron is only the type of altitha alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the type of tympanistria or the type of hyporchia, because this is fatal.
"And when you have treated this type of diabetic tympanistria with medicine and your treatment does not work, then consider that if the patient has already succumbed to weakness or is suffering from another type of diabetes, such as cough or abdominal pain and similar conditions, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is concern about this.
"But if you see the patient is full of strength and has no other illness besides diabetes alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then the method for treating them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to them by pressing their abdomen with your hand, removing the water from the region below the navel, and then take a thorny spatula of this kind:
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And next consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because then you must make an incision below the navel for three fingers' width, to the right of the patient, on the pubic region.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers' width.
And if the generation is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side.
And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wants, so that the excesses do not flow to that place easily.
And then perforate with the instrument all along the intestine, and then introduce it into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the skin, and you will extract that; and if it is the size of a nail or thereabouts.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the empty place, which is the location of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument like this: and it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or tin. At the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is sharpened like the tip of a feather, as you see.
Certainly! Here’s the translation of the provided sentence:
Here's my best guess at the meaning of this sentence and a line-by-line translation:
And immediately extract the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes it, for as soon as it is held by the chain that pulls it out from the container which is counted to you that you should pierce it in that manner.
And immediately repeat the process on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water each time, and do this for several days in a row, and be careful not to leave any water behind except a little.
But if you fear for the patient and leave behind a large quantity of water, then treat that area with burial in hot sand, and fumigate it in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach and the spleen near the area of water extraction, as I have previously instructed.
Chapter .51 (or "fifty-one" if written in words)
Of the treatment of infants whose urinary passages are not perforated.
Sometimes one of the infants comes out of the mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or there is a narrow opening or it is not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to pierce with a fine needle as soon as it is born.
And then place a thin lead wire in the hole and tie it off, and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, lift him up so that he can urinate; then put him back down.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot will not close this opening.
But if the hole is small, it should be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in which the hole is not in its proper place are called hypospadias, and the reason for this is that the one who is born with it has the end of the penis at the bottom, so he cannot urinate straight ahead; rather, he lifts his penis upwards with his hand. And it is not a generative organ, because the semen cannot reach the mother properly, and it is a very bad condition.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his back, and then you extend the head of his penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the head of the penis from the foreskin with a sharp knife, like cutting a quill, or as if you were slicing off some part, so that the middle part comes out resembling the head of the penis and the hole falls in the middle place where it should.
And take care that in your operation for blood flow, because it often happens this way; and pause on the patient with something that will stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of the disease which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of the corruption and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Many times this disease occurs in the penis, which is a prominent piece of red flesh.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, which means you should suspend it with fine thread and cut it off until it is completely healed; then place on that spot a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is cured.
And if the disease is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply a pointed cautery near its beginning and its root.
But if the disease is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the disease is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part of the disease that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; and then you treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both parts of the foreskin together, it is not certain that it will not spread.
And if you see that the genitals and foreskin have turned black and are corrupted, then you must remove everything that has darkened and is beginning to decay or has already decayed; and next, smear this area with honey mixed with finely ground and sifted pomegranate peel.
And then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
For the cautery is beneficial for two purposes at once, that is, to stop the blood flow and to heal the wound when it has begun to decay.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is healthy, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), you should gently remove it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you should scrape off some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, because the foreskin, being delicate, is easily pierced due to its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread that has been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking together again.
And then it should be treated with six stitches until it is healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of children and on the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for all diseases like other illnesses; however, since it is our operation and within our control, and especially because it mainly concerns children, it is necessary that we determine the best procedure and most gentle method to preserve health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and the reason is that we have acquired this knowledge through experience. That is why I have found most of the craftsmen and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a razor and towels; they also use bandages with honey and cauterization with a nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and found no better way of modifying with scissors, with thread and needle for sewing in the manner of a nail, because many times you must cut off the tip more from above, because the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains below, and it is very easy to be forced into another incision and certain pain. And in the modification which is done with pincers and is pointed, like those used by cobblers, the incision at the end of the male member is not secure, because it easily enters into its hole.
But in the operation with a nail, you often find iron and it corrupts your work. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times there is none in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this.
But of the modification which is done with scissors and thread with needle, I have found the best method through experimentation, because the scissors are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and thus as you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made a compression with the thread in the shape containing the foreskin of the whole penis from every side, with which no error occurs at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down as much as possible if it is one of those who understands a little, do not let him move but place a pillow under his knees only, and leave him like this until the next day.
Then make the child happy in all possible ways so that he can regain his consciousness. Then have everything prepared and ready between your hands, and do not be hesitant; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the child's groin and blow into the urethra, and pull it in until the head of the penis is visible, and then clean it of any accumulated dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification is as follows:
The nails on the forceps should be blunt at one end and sharp at the other, so that the hammer's handle is not too short, and the length of both should be equal to the length of two handles each.
But the mistake in modification is that if you pull the internal chain too strongly or break it off completely, you must insert it again.
Therefore, you should extend that of your thumb with your nail in front of the opening and insert it according to the same measure.
And if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the penis, then let it subside until the swelling has subsided, and gently scrape it off, and insert it as you have prepared.
And be careful with the head of the penis, for that is not appropriate for it.
Therefore, treat it with something that solidifies the wound with the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it has been inserted too much and you follow the above instructions, that will not harm him.
And care for him with water until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
About the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to a stone, congealed blood clot, pus, or polyp, and similar things as we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved with water as we have said, and a powerful cause is made on the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of him with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a concave tip like a bird's quill, with a length similar to that of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
Based on the given context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's attempt to translate the provided sentence:
"And make a cut on the patient over the bladder, and open the bladder and the penis with wet oils, olive oil, and rose water.
"Then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis down toward the navel; then pass the catheter through that opening; then pass it through until it reaches the bladder, and this should cause the patient to urinate freely, and if not done in this order, it is due to the twisting of the urethra.
"Then draw out the pus with a small piece of wool, little by little, because the urine will soak the wool.
"Then extract the catheter and use it for treatment with urine, and continue to use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
"Chapter 59.
"On the method of irrigating the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
"When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe burning sensation, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
"Until the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed. And in that case there are three openings: two from one side, like this.
In the beginning it is a hollow place where something is wrapped up, according to how much of that thing there is, without addition. When some cause draws out those humors, they are drawn out; and when they are expelled, it also draws them out. And if they are expelled a long time, just as a lantern with which one fights at sea by night, it shines.
Therefore, when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of the lantern into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is wrapped up in the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the lantern.
And then insert the extremity of the lantern into the penis as we have mentioned in the chapter on the bladder; and then draw out the moisture with it, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder and the patient feels it.
The shape of the subtle crystal with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
And let it be made of silver or lead, with the head resembling a small feather, and then insert it inside the wound.
And then take a pig's bladder, and place in it the liquid you want to congeal in the bladder, and then tie it securely between two strong ligatures with double thread, and warm that liquid over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystal into the wound.
And then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the liquid until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it all around its circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes so that they are tied together; and then add the circle in the same way as you would sew a garment, because you place in it whatever liquid you want among the humors, oils, and waters.
And then you tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
Of the extraction of stones.
We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
And we have said the stone on which cutting operation with the hand and incision should be performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is placed in the bladder.
And I will now tell you about it with a clear and concise explanation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly occurs in children; and of its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient scratches his penis, and often shakes it, and then becomes erect; and with this, you will recognize the cause.
And it is easier to heal children from this up until they reach fourteen years of age; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. But in young people it is better because they are between these two extremes.
And of that [condition] where the stone is larger and the cure is lighter; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [condition].
Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning, it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the fissure that is in his intestines; because this fissure sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its search.
And then take the patient by his feet and raise him up and down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or moves from its place, or sometimes.
And then make that incision between your prepared hands, and let his hands be below his parts, so that the bladder is entirely made sloping downwards.
And then find that [stone] and take all of it out.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly place a section over him [the patient].
And if it does not come out with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if he is a grown man, and insert it into his anus. Here is my attempt at translating the given line: And slowly turn that small [object] little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and expel it towards the outer parts away from the place where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to lift the rope that is under the thighs, in the area of the incision.
Then insert a spatula, the shape of which looks like this: And cut through it between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the side of the left hip; and let the incision be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to the amount that the stone allows, and no more, because when you press with your finger which is in the anus, the stone will come out without difficulty.
And know that there are some stones with angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult.
Here's my attempt at translating this line:
"Therefore, if it is that which is sharp and narrow, adjust it into the crevice.
"And if it is not thus removed, then you must invent a device to be placed on or around the object, with an end that is as sharp as a file used for carving stone, and which does not slip; or you can insert a fine tool with a curved tip underneath the object.
"But if you cannot do so, then widen the opening slightly, and if you see blood flow, cut off that part strongly with powdered vitriol.
"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning press your hand against the opening of the bladder and cut around it; then press a little more on that area; and do the same if there are more than two stones.
"And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorant to cut it with a large incision, because two bad outcomes may happen to the patient: either death or continuous dribbling of urine, because the area is not completely healed.
"But administer an expulsive to make it come out, or use forceps in the incision to extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and strengthen it with that. And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in warm oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be drawn out gently.
And then lay the patient on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with diaphanol ointment and diaper ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is harsh and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, causing urination to be blocked (and this is known by the excretion of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corrupt and cause putrefaction in the patient.
And then wash the wound with strong vinegar, water and salt, and apply an opposite remedy suitable for their constitution until they are healed.
And it is necessary in all hours of treatment that you read both the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it has entered the body, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before it becomes dry, because many times this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experienced this, and it is that you take an iron awl, whose form is as follows:
with a sharpened tip like a triangle, pointed, placed in a handle.
Then take a wire, and tie the bladder with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with ease until the awl reaches that stone. And turn the awl with your hand in that stone little by little, and pierce its opening until you make it penetrate on the other side; because the urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand over what is left of the stone on the outside of the bladder, because that part is sharp and has been forced out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text: And then you cut over the stone in that groove between two sutures. And then extract that. And then unbind the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood, which is present in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bandage the stone with fat below the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other bandage above, for when the fat is unbound near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary that when you bandage the fat above, you lift the chain to the upper parts or return your compliment, and cover the wound in such a way as we have said.
Chapter 61
Of the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone is seen in one of them, then its cure is difficult and it is forbidden by too many means.
One reason is that the woman is very weak.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to explain herself to the doctor when she is chaste or among the women who have husbands.
The third reason is that you would not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with hands.
The fourth reason is that the place of incision in women over stone [likely referring to a location near the bladder] is far from the place of the stone, so you will need a preceding incision, and there is fear associated with this.
However, if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary for you to take a midwife who is very skilled, and such a woman is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that [skilled midwife], then look for a surgeon who is clever and subtle, or present a noblewoman well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who is knowledgeable in this art.
Therefore, present her [the skilled woman], and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to see if the woman is a virgin. If she is, then she should insert her finger into the woman's rectum and feel for the stone. евич Therefore, present her [the skilled woman], and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to see if the woman is a virgin. If she is, then she should insert her finger into the woman's rectum and feel for the stone. ievalid
Therefore, if [the stone] is found, cut off [the woman's] finger, and then command her to make an incision on herself.
"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and press downwards on the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with good force.
"So if it is found, then it should be gradually drawn from the bladder opening to the lower parts with all of its strength until it reaches the level of the pelvis.
"And then you should cut through that projection at the top of the vagina to reach the level of the pelvis from whatever side it may be, and place the stone in that part, ensuring that the patient's finger remains on the stone until it is extracted.
"And at the beginning, make the incision small; then insert the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the amount that you know the stone will pass through it.
"And know that there are different types of stones: for they can be few and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
"So you should know which type it is by the way you indicate what you want to do with it.
And if you see blood flow, place powdered vitriol on the spot and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And prepare with you the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and press it firmly with bandages and bindings, and do not repeat this; let the stone remain and do not remove it, for the patient will die soon. Then care for the wound.
Therefore, once the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
On sectioning for hernia.
A hydrocele is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white bag which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a scrotum.
Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
"And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, because it is there that this material is infused, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the genitals.
"And this moisture has various colors, because its color can be tending towards yellowish or reddish, or red, or black and feculent, or watery white, and it is the latter that is most common.
"And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known are these: because if it is in the white bladder that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains all of that part.
"And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round and divided like an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another type of egg.
"And if the humidity is between the sac of the genitals and the white bladder, then cut [or drain] below the navel.
"And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the swelling with a sharp instrument whose form precedes; and judge what is inside based on what appears on the surface of the instrument.
When we come to the care of him with a fever, then it is necessary to order the patient to be bloodletted if this is possible for you, and see to his things closely.
Then have him lie on his back on a cause somewhat raised, and place soft cloths under him.
Then sit down on the left side of him, and command the assistant to sit on his right side, extending their rod to one of two sides at the base of the knees and the beginning of the navel of the belly.
Then take a lancet and carefully split the base of the knees halfway along its length up to near the pubis.
And let the section be made equally straight along the line that you should follow along the pubic bone, until it reaches the white chord.
And scrape it off, and observe, and be careful not to cut into that; and let your scraping with which you scrape continue until it is suspended by the most delicate and finely examined incision according to the amount possible for you.
Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the clamp to the divided parts above; do not touch the cord that holds the testicles, and cut the clamp in such a manner as is possible for you. And cut it completely or in pieces, especially its thin flap, because if you do not examine the cut carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
But if the water proceeds from outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the clamp, return it inside, and then close the two lips of the testicle cord with a suture, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the water corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you cut the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, and extract the water, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water has gathered in two places at once, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you have done with the other; and if it seems to be one operation, then do it.
Here's the translation of the given sentence into English:
Here's the translation of your sentence:
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of with an incision and iron; it is that you take a delicate knife-shaped cautery and inscribe with it the cord of the testicles, and it ignites according to what we have recommended until it reveals the white cyst containing the water. And then you take a cautery of this form: And it is shaped like the Greek letter delta (Δ).
Then you puncture that cyst with it and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled.
Then you extract the cyst with tweezers, you remove it with tweezers, and you remove it with a thin ignited cautery; and you inscribe that as much as possible until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the surrounding area.
And know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
However, if you encounter an abscess during the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary for you to treat whatever obstacle arises accordingly, with the care that is suitable for it as mentioned earlier.
Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
This text appears to be discussing some form of medical treatment for a patient with an abscess (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
And make sure it is widely open so that all the water can flow out.
And then place a cloth over the area and tie it securely, so that the remaining water can flow out. And then care for it until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should perforate it: and this is done only because the white skin at the orifice of the wound creates resistance and prevents the release of water, then you must insert into the wound a pen-like instrument with which water is extracted from the bladder, the form of which has been previously described; or fit in the opening of the wound a small tube.
And know that the water may return, and it should be watched for up to six or seven months; and when it has returned, then it should be perforated in the same manner, because the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the incision of a flesh-bound hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great risk of losing it and causing harm in the greater dispositions; therefore, I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better method.
And I remember the operation in that case and the signs of inflammation.
Therefore, I say that inflammation occurs in the bodies of those whose humors are imbalanced and this happens for several reasons: either due to an acute, bitter superfluity which is poured into the humors, or due to trauma.
And the color of the inflammation matches the color of the body part affected, and there is no pain found in it, and it is a severe inflammation.
And if the inflammation is hard and stone-like, its color will be dark, and there will be no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of these, so that its memory is already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the inflammation when it is pressed with these fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it at all, even with compression by these fingers.
And it is possible that incision can be made on this type of inflammation and on other flesh; it is that you cut the skin of the humors, and then spread the egg over the parts above, and extract the white from inside, and free the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them off, and then cut the suspensors after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already with those meats hardened, then it is necessary that you remove the egg and insert that (meat).
And if there is an adhesion between some parts of the liver or the gallbladder, then it is necessary that you separate all that adhesion and insert a round probe into that place.
But if there is a lump of flesh in the place of the adhesion that comes from behind, then it is necessary that you insert everything that belongs to it, and remove the egg as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and afterward care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the treatment of hernia that occurs in the bladder.
The bladder is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to what has been mentioned previously.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that we perform an operation on it according to what the ancients have done.
And I say that it is necessary to lay the patient on an elevated bed; then unhook the suspenders of the testicles from below; and then take the cord of the genitals with your said fingers with the thumbs that are proven on the penis; and let those other servants do the same as you, and extend those with great extension.
Then cut longitudinally with a sharp scalpel through the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape from all sides as we have said in the removal of arteries which are in the temples.
Then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie it first at the beginning of the places where life exists, and then tie it again at their ends. Then cut these longitudinally through the middle of the body according to its length, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound with the same care as for other wounds in which you wish health to be generated, so that the vessels which are nourishing one of two genitals may fall, because this is not a bad thing.
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving the testicles and blood vessels. Here's a line-by-line translation:
It seems like you've provided the chapter number rather than the sentence. Please provide the full sentence or text that you would like me to translate from the medieval medical treatise.
Of the care of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that opens in the navel extended over the belly from some angles of the belly, because the intestines coming out of that opening go into one of the intestines.
And this opening is either of the navel or of its protrusion, and these two types occur for various reasons: by a blow, by a jump, by a shout, by an elevation due to some serious cause, or by resemblance.
The sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the navel, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess inside the belly because the navel presses on the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the navel, for at first it causes sudden and intense pain; and it is a diverse abscess appearing under the skin of the testicle, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, and its body remains outside the navel.
And sometimes the intestine is forgotten with the towel, and this type of hernia is called an incarcerated inguinoscrotal hernia.
And sometimes it is done with windiness, and sometimes the intestine runs through a slit, and here it gets stuck, which is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid injury in that area.
And the method of operating on this is to command the patient to return the intestine with his hand into the deep parts of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then place him on his back between your hands, and raise his legs.
Then place the cord that is the spermatic cord above it, and cut the spermatic cord completely along its length; then insert two scissors into the lips of the incision as needed to open the incision with them.
And if, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from that the scrotum is forgotten.
And then you should remove those parts which are below the cord of the testicles, until you discover the hard white tissue from each side.
Then you should insert your finger into the testicle, between the white tissue that is below the cord of the egg and the second white tissue, and dissolve any adhesions that are in the area behind the egg.
Then with your right hand, grasp the cord of the testicles on the outer parts, and with this, raise the white tissue with your left hand, and lift the egg with the tissue to the incision site; command the assistant to extend the egg upward, and you dissolve the adhesions behind with a complete solution.
And make sure with your fingers that there is no intestine wrapped in the hard white tissue. But if you find any of it, then you should return it to the abdomen below.
And then cut off the piece below the ligature of the testicle so that blood and pus flow as we have explained in what we said before.
And then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligature that we have recommended (and sometimes the white thread is cauterized, which we mentioned near the cutting of the testicle to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if the scab takes a long time to fall off, then dip it in hot water and place it on the area until it falls off, as we said.
"And then heal the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
It seems you meant to include a sentence to translate. Please provide the next source sentence, and I'll do my best to translate it into English for you.
"On windy hernias.
"In this type of hernia, we have not seen anyone who has been cured by using iron.
"And the first say that it is done in this way, as we have recounted for hernias that are with pus; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that one with ease; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with water that opens it, until the vessels fall.
"And heal the wound as we have said until it is healed.
"Chapter 67.
"About the displacement that occurs in the joints.
"Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said, and it protrudes the place.
"And they do not assign any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, that is little; and it returns in all hours.
"But if the time is prolonged with that, it is a closed rupture in the bag until the intestine comes out into the bag; and this happens because of the extension of the bag which is in the joints as we have said, which cause is because the bag is stretched, and thus it becomes softened and the place becomes swollen and protrudes.
And his treatment is with a cautery in the manner that has been described before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the affected area of the broken apostems with a section by the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the bandage until it is uncovered.
And then take the reed and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the abdomen.
And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the cloth together with stitches.
And then remove the end of the reed, and do not insert it completely into the cloth, nor should you extend the opening, or any other similar cause as I will tell you in the treatment of internal hernia.
And then treat it with the treatment for wounds, and when you have inserted the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the cloth is tight and does not fit the prominence of the break.
Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
It looks like you only provided the heading "Capitol .lxviii." for translation. This appears to be a chapter or section header rather than a full sentence with content that can be translated line by line into English. If you provide a complete sentence from the text, I'd be happy to help translate it!
This is a difficult text due to its archaic language and possible scribal errors or corruptions. Here's a possible interpretation:
Certainly! Let's translate this sentence line by line:
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And if you wish, in the beginning cut away the excess of the softened tendon with three or four boiled applications and with firm suture.
Then carefully cut between the sutures; then treat with care for other ailments until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Chapter 69
Of Castration
You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, but it has been reported to me that I may remember it in this book; and the memory of it is not necessary except for two reasons: one is so that the physician knows about it when asked about it, and thus knows how to care for the one on whom it has occurred. The other reason is that we have often had need of castrating other animals for our benefit from them, as with sheep, goats, pigs, and similarly with animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by incision and cutting.
But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down. And then take those with your hand inside until they are dissolved and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary for you to hold the animal and press the spermatic cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and cut over each testicle with an incision until you have processed both testicles.
And then cut those pus which you will have scraped off each one. And do not leave any on those of the scrotum, except for a subtle one which is over the vessels.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by attrition, because attrition leaves no trace of the testicles, so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .70
On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: one is when it appears that the space in the spermatic cord, which is between two testicles, has the shape of a woman's vulva with pubic hair.
And sometimes from that part of the body there is urine in the scrotum.
But in women it is different: the female vulva is similar to two male testicles, a little smaller, and at the entrance there are two small folds of skin like the male foreskin, and two more folds inside.
And there are three types of treatment: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you cut those tightened meats until the pressure of that one disappears, and then treat those with the treatment of the other diseases.
And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the scrotum, there is no treatment or operation for him.
Chapter 21
About a swelling and prominent flesh due to causes related to women.
A strong swelling is caused by natural reasons until it becomes excessive and must be treated with care; sometimes in some women it grows so much that it spreads like in men and can reach during intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary that you reduce the swelling with your hand or a needle and cut it.
And do not end or close, especially in the region of the anus, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then treat it with a remedy for wounds until it heals.
But flesh born is flesh that grows within the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and quickly exits from the parts outside according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must close it as we would a membrane, and treat it until it heals. ⇒ But flesh-born is flesh that grows within the mother's horror until it fills that space, and quickly exits from the parts outside according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must close it like a membrane, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 72.
About the treatment of hernia.
Hernia is when a woman's womb is not perforated, or it has a small hole. ⇒ Hernia is when the womb of a woman is not perforated, or it has a small opening. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to previous illness, and that is caused either by poorly attached flesh or by subtle or dense adhesions.
And it occurs either in the womb of the mother or in her sides, or in the upper part of her or in the lower part of her, and it is forbidden to sew, to undertake, and to give birth, and especially forbidden are menstruations.
And the knowledge of that is done by observing the midwife, if the appearance is obvious, then it's a miscarriage; but if not, then you search for it with your words or with the ray.
But if the miscarriage is subtle and near both lips, then you cut and disrupt it.
And place over both lips some powder, and then place your fingers' indicators from both hands together.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread, and then extend both lips with force until that subtle thread is broken and the miscarriage is exposed.
And then take some wool and dip it in oil and place it on the spot, and have a man watch over it day and night so that the cut does not heal. 😊
But if the thread is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the miscarriage is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off. 😊
And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, and yarrow, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the wound is not easily healed.
And keep it in place for some days and administer something dry to the patient.
And then treat it with another healing method until it is healed.
And sometimes this occurs in the major native parts of other fleshes, and then you should proceed according to this manner. However, if this is due to a cancerous abscess, the cancerous abscess which is in the major part should not be treated in any way with iron.
Chapter 73.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail, and red boils which occur in the female genitals.
Hemorrhoids are considered the openings of many veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids and made tails.
And I have already said in the division the types of these and their signs, and I will say the same about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails, when they are in the front part of the major [genital area] and do not appear to the touch, then in those there should be no treatment with iron. xspace
Based on the pattern of similarity between Latin, Italian, Spanish and French, let's try to decipher this sentence:
And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and approximately extend her with the scissors or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razor.
And approximately sprinkle on those the blood flow from one of the cutting powders without bitterness, such as alum and similar to these.
And then wrap her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then give her to fast in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and mallows and similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on the back of him.
And if the bleeding has stopped, it is good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses to the breasts without scarification.
And then take wool and soak it in coriander juice or hawthorn juice or rosemary juice with strong vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And take care that it heals well.
Chapter 74
A puncture of the bladder has occurred in the mother.
Many types of abscesses have occurred in the mother, such as: caruncle, lenticular, ulcerative, abscess with a tail, herpetiformis, fistulae morrhae, gouty abscess, tile abscess and other abscesses. And I have already listed these illnesses and their types, as well as their symptoms and treatments in the previous section.
And it is fitting that I speak in this treatise about the boil that appears in the mother when it is one of the curable abscesses, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with swelling and fever, and if it reddens and throbs, then do not cut it with perforation, and treat it with a remedy that promotes maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
And then you must make the woman sit on a low stool with two legs; and lean her back so that her feet are positioned lower than her belly, and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms below her knees, and bind each one with a wet bandage as needed.
And then the midwife should follow from behind and to the right, with the instrument used to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be discussed next.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it with the ray in the entrance of the mother of the woman, and that what enters from the instrument into the mother is no more than the ray of the mother, and lay down the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the entrance of the mother, then you should place cloths over the texture of the entrance of the mother to prevent the entry of any instrument into the entrance of the mother.
And it is necessary that you place the handle that runs along the back of the instrument higher up, and that the one administering holds the instrument and turns the handle until the orifice of the mother is opened.
And when the growth appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and wet, then you should dry that place with a broad paddle.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a compress soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some styptic properties; and place a bandage over it at the entrance of the mother.
And place outside a mother [nurse] and on the pillow clean wool soaked in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And let it be treated for about two days with an ointment that should be applied until the patient is healed.
And sometimes the mother [nurse] and the wound are washed in this way: it is cleaned with water and honey, then with water in which rosemary or long-leafed aristolochia has been boiled, and finally returned to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the flesh, then you should be forbidden from treating the patient with iron, and take care of him instead with water as we have said earlier.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to treat pregnant women when they are affected by this unnatural condition, as shown in the figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is that when you see the woman expelling the excrement from below and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is relieved because what is on her is delivered, and she hastens the exit of the fetus, then know that this delivery is according to the natural figure, and it is the birth of the head first, and the second one hanging or suspended by the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen of the patient so that the baby descends slightly, because when they descend onto their head, give them the secondine, and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
But that which is the case in this situation is unnatural and not praiseworthy, because when the baby comes out with its feet first and its body comes out before its head and feet, or one hand before the other, or the head comes out with the hand, or turns easily onto its neck, and resembles the figures of those who are not to be praised.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against error and deceit.
And I am showing all the figures of those, and what is happening in them, so that it may be signified by this and have been written about it.
When the baby comes out headfirst by natural impulse, but that impulse is very strong in the woman and difficult for her, and sometimes her strength has already weakened, then do this: make a potion with fennel seed and moist oils, and have the women hold it under their arms.
And then insert the midwife's finger between the small lips of the vulva and separate them with it, or cut through that area with her nail until the liquid inside comes out due to its moisture. And press the woman's belly until the child is expelled.
However, if it does not come out, then the woman must be anointed with oil of rosemary and oil of fenugreek mixed together.
And then command the woman to be anointed and pressed, making her sneeze with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will be expelled immediately afterwards.
And if both hands of the child are delivered first, then it is necessary that you reduce them with great gentleness little by little. But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then strike the stool against the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the striking.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the membrane of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and pull it out with even force, because that will cause it to be expelled.
When the child emerges from its mother's womb onto its feet, then you should quickly push it back in, and then turn the small child around, and then swallow it, and then take one of its feet and gently stretch it out.
But as it has come out into the world, then you should order it to be pressed, and make it cough with conditions, because it will be a foundling if God wills it.
And if it is not a foundling with that which we have spoken of, then you should return the child little by little until you place it in accordance with its natural form, because then it will be a foundling with a lighter birth.
And if it is forbidden with all that we have spoken of, then take some wax from an altar candle and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar with good force, and then smear the woman's vulva, the lower part of her belly. And then make her sit in warm water until she reaches the hypochondria.
And when you see that the separated parts are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and apply it to him. This is a challenging task because the text combines elements of several Romance languages and uses some archaic terms that are not commonly used today. I'll do my best to provide an accurate translation based on the context you've provided:
"Also observe if the baby is hanging laterally from one of your hands. "Try to reduce (move) the baby's hand back into its body, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk.
"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and shake her hips with vigorous blows, and then administer remedies which I have recommended made of linseed.
When the delivery has arrived, then perform that scissor [procedure] on the vulva, and then study over the reduction of the hand, and equalize the birth according to natural form, and make the woman sneeze, and command her to press against herself until it is expelled.
When the child is delivered, his belly will be expanded and his face turned towards his mother's back. Let the midwife take hold of the child's hand and then slowly turn him around, and have her do this with ease.
And when it is done and he has been wrapped up, then place on his head that which we have mentioned of oil and swaddling cloths.
And then command him to suck little by little, and when you have done this, then perform that scissor [procedure] on one nipple and command her to be inclined towards the right breast, and then command her to press against it; and make her sneeze with care. The delivery of the prepared infant is over the side [of the bed].
When the mother is no longer terrified according to this method, consider [this], and then you shall incise the second membrane with your nail until it has been evacuated of moisture.
And if the tumor is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you should incise it from the belly button, to prevent it from being retained and causing death.
And next, push the tumor towards the divided parts until you place it where it is needed, and instruct the woman to squeeze her thighs together, and the tumor will come out easily with a gentle push, if God wills it.
Birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born from many copulations, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is strange and rarely happens; there are five causes of it, which are natural, not supernatural.
And these are the causes, whether they are multiplied, a second birth, and they are separated by some space, distinguishing those joined at the ligament in each of their umbilicus. Sometimes they are expelled as if it were one fetus by natural light pushing, and sometimes they come out by an unnatural push as we have recounted.
And if some are difficult to deliver and you reach the point we mentioned about unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and finesse, slowly and deliberately, and has been trained according to every possible configuration for which she has been prepared by her training for the purpose of healing.
And it is remembered that what forms in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes a womb can form one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, even ten embryos, and it has already been verified that one woman aborted six and another ten, all fully formed, the cause of which was determined by the glorious wise men.
And all this should be known by the midwife, for she must be well-versed in this similar task, and therefore she should approach it as needed.
Chapter 76.
Of extracting the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus as described in the division of treatment and it has not yet exited, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is healthy and not suffering from any of the conditions that may cause her loss.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back with her head inclined downwards and her knees raised.
And let the assistant hold one of the two parts or tie it with a bandage to prevent the body from stretching before the procedure is complete.
And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oils, honey, and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search for the correct location where to place the nails during the procedure.
In these places: therefore, consider whether the fetus is ready to descend onto its head, and then place your nails in the following locations on it: the heels, the neck, the mouth, the palate, under the chin, or between the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
But if it descends by the feet, then place your nails in the heel or between the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the nails with the right hand and place their curve in the location between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert your hand and place the nails in one of those locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the desired result.
This sentence appears to be describing a medical procedure involving positioning and supporting the patient. Here's a possible translation:
"Moreover, it should be well-seated on all sides, so that its extraction is made easier in the same way as it is done with a tooth for its removal.
"It is also necessary that the extension be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them, turning and loosening what is retained.
"Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten (still inside), then the nails should be cut closer to where it is most open; and do this until the entire child is delivered.
"However, if the hand has come out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its stiffness, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then draw it out until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the wrist or in the elbow.
"And you should do the same for the other hand and both feet.
"But if the head of the child is large, or it becomes stiff during delivery, or there is water in the head, then you should insert between the fingers a spatula with sharp edges and cut the head, extracting the water, or you can use an instrument called 'alundat' to suction out the fluid.
And similarly proceed if the tumor is large by nature: then it is necessary to incise that with an almagrete or to take that with an alunda, as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should split the collarbone until the moisture that is in the feet has drained out.
But if it is not complicated and does not respond to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the sides of the abdomen are inflamed or have dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate them until the moisture in them flows out.
But if the tumor is on its feet, then its attraction is gentle and its direction towards the mother's mouth is gentle.
But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary that you extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped over your hand, and that you split the abdomen and feet until the water in them flows out.
But if the other members are present and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is open, then she should insert her hand into the birth canal, and search for the head with that, and draw it towards the mentioned parts until it reaches the mother's vagina, and then insert one or two fingers into it, and draw it out with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an aposteme that occurs in her, then it is necessary to not puncture her; instead, it is necessary to administer an infusion of moist, fatty substances. And apply plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the abscess is on the same side as the patient's affected area, then if possible, it should be lanced; and an infusion of moist, fatty substances, as mentioned for a live abscess, should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in sections and extracted.
And it is necessary to leave no cause remaining inside the wound.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the infusion that we have mentioned for treating abscesses that occur in the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that, another live fetus was attached, and the other fetus is also dead. It seems like the text is describing a case of an abscess in the navel area that has been present for some time and has now become infected and started to release pus. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And I was called to care for him and treated him for a long time, but the wound has not healed.
So I placed on him some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and after a few days, another bone; and I was very surprised, since there are no bones in the stomach.
So then I thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Therefore I investigated the wound and extracted from it many bones, the woman being in her ninth month of pregnancy; and she had lived that way for a long time, until a small arm came out of her.
And I did not consider this strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to those who practice the medical art with their hands for healing.
Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
The shape of the hook with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of the strengthener in which the leaves are cut, and at this cutting there should be two hooks on each end of two feet. However, this hook must be finer and more precise, and it should be made either from ivory or boxwood.
Let's break down the text line by line:
And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she can open with them when you turn the two prescribed fingers.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it there should be two such additions, and the length of each addition should be about one palm, and the width of each should be two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these, then make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging over the edge, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount of opening you want for the mouth of the mother until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
The form of pushing with which the child is pushed out.
The form of support with which the large head is contained.
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end, as seen, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as seen, with teeth like saw teeth, with which it is cut and contained. Form of treatment:
Method for treating those with a spine (spinal condition):
Method for treating those with two spines:
Method of using a spatula with two ends for cutting off the head.
Method of using two flat spatulas.
All these instruments being exercised, and the more varied their types and prepared by craftsmen, the lighter the operation will be and the more beneficial for the people due to their quantity.
And you should always have these instruments prepared, wherever you are, because their necessity cannot be avoided.
On the removal of the placenta.
When the placenta is retained during childbirth, then you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and have her sneeze with condition [i.e., on command], and place your hand over her mouth and nose. If by doing this it comes out, that's good.
And if not, then you take a piece of cloth and make a hole in it, and place in that [hole] burning herbs such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, dried grapes, cinnamon, and St. John's wort. "All these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water and placed over the fire.
"Then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth and hold it there until the steam reaches the cavity of her womb.
"Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the retained fetus will be expelled quickly.
"But if this treatment persists and the fetus does not come out, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, then insert it into the vagina and seek the fetus with it. When you have found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the fetus, extract it bit by bit straight up so that the mother does not experience a violent attraction. "First, it is necessary for the right and left ribs to be moved easily.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with an enema and with a potion of oil made from herbs.
However, if all the causes we have recommended are not considered, then be careful not to make it worse by repeating the process of removal. Instead, ensure that whatever comes out of her is placed at the mouth of the mother, and then promptly treat it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to putrefy in a few days and then dissolve and be expelled.
But when it putrefies, it becomes a very bad substance for the head and the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, at that point, it is necessary to administer sublimation fumes and appropriate remedies for this.
But some of the ancients have already tried sublimation fumes made from narcissus and dried figs.
The method of the instrument with which the woman is sublimated to remove menstrual blood and the afterbirth:
It should be made of glass or iron.
And the subtle end is placed in the vessel, and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation is placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep that one inside until the smoke has dissipated and then bring in another one.
Of the treatment for a child's unruptured anus.
When newborn infants are born with their anuses not yet pierced, which is a delicate and dangerous situation. Then the midwife should come and pierce it with her fingernail; if not, pierce it with a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the sphincter.
And immediately place on it wool soaked in wine and oil; and then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
But if you fear that it is blocked, then place a tube in the opening for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And if obstruction of the anus occurs due to the solidification of a wound or abscess; then that solidification must be cut open, and it should be treated with water as we have said in the treatment for lead.
Of the treatment for fistulas that occur under the anus.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the anus are called abscesses and swellings, which happen near the outside of the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is either an ulcer or boils.
And when that swelling is old and runs with white, watery moisture or fine pus, and sometimes from these ulcers some penetrating ones occur.
And those penetrating ones are known by this: it exits from them with discharge and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from discharge, and very often worms exit from them.
And some of those ulcers, at times in the space, penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones enter the joint of the thigh, and into the bone of the femur.
And how a penetrating ulcer into the anus and non-penetrating is known: you place your finger in the anus, and carefully insert a thin probe of iron or bronze into the ulcer when there is no obstruction.
But if there is an obstruction in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all and there is no reason for discharge or worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and therefore turn to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the passage of the penis, then its meaning is the discharge of urine from that [fistula] and prevention [of urine] from this, so that the place be healed with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then its sign is that the tent [or probe] goes through here if it is not blocked by the bone; and there is pain in the surrounding area of the exit point; and that from it always comes pus; and that medicine has no effect on it, nor does it heal with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure for all, and the cure of these is labor and futility of the foolish doctors on whom they depend.
But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already tested.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs between yours, the thighs should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead or iron probe if there is an obstruction in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe passes through.
And if that makes the patient feel pain around the neck, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger the tent already by itself descuberta penetrar, or if you feel between your finger and that syphac or flesh, then know for certain that that is penetrating; and then do not work on it, because there is no healing there, as we have said.
However, some may say that in some men it heals late.
And of the medication by which help is expected for him, it is that you should prepare a subtle fire cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until all the flesh of the fistula adheres together like the quill of a bird feather.
And then bandage it with clean cloths soaked in vinegar until all the adhered flesh is healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and healing. If it heals, good; if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
This text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for treating a fistula, which is an abnormal connection between two organs or tissue that shouldn't be connected. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then carefully clean those fistulated flesh areas that resemble the quills of a porcupine, ensuring none are left behind.
And if there is bleeding that occurs between you and your operation when inserting those flesh areas, then it is advisable to use an instrument of cautery with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good habits: it tightens the tissues, and it stops the blood and dries out the humidity.
And then dress the wound with clean bandages or white cloth until the location receives a cast, and then heal the wound with ointments that promote hardening and healing of the flesh.
And so the medications that have astringent and drying properties, when used to restore [the wound], it is considered healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula already extends into the depth of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And so if you find the opening and there is a layer of cicatrix or flesh between it and the surface, and it is close to the penetration, then do not operate on it directly but rather through a process of faith and hope.
Certainly! Here is a line-by-line translation of the given text into English: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it runs from the buttocks around the surface of the body with the string to the edge of the anus, then take a perforated-end probe, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts in this way.
And then insert that thread, wrapped with five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the edge of the anus directly, then you extract the thread from that hole as if you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and adjust the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it this way for a day or two. And when you notice that the thread is penetrating deeper into the flesh, then tighten well so that those pieces of flesh between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall off.
Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate by whatever method you have prepared, except that it should be very deep, because it is not your job to do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do this until it is healed.
Based on the pattern provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Hemorrhoids are of two types, either resembling coal within the anus or those which are like raisins. And these can be small or large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is dark, and they protrude outside the anus, located at its extremities.
However, those that protrude from the anus are of little moisture, from which flows citron water or a small amount of blood with a continuous flow, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and express until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then cut them off and suspend them with a hook that you have on your finger, and then cauterize the base of these.
But if hooks cannot be used due to the moisture and softness of these, then take them with a rough cloth or towel or woolen thread, and extract them with your said fingers, and then cauterize them and sprinkle some warm powders on them near the cautery site, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them as previously stated in the chapter on cautery. And then care for him with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the feces do not come out, then irritate the patient with an irritant containing a small amount of biting powder, and wash him with the water that is in the colon so that he may evacuate easily when the patient is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause of this is simple. You should take them with your finger or with tweezers and push them back in. Then care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
And he who has performed the incision should administer a suture of them in this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the hemorrhoids at the divided parts above. Make the needle penetrate to the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, transversely; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then knot the thread and remove the needle.
Do this for all [hemorrhoids], and leave one of them unstitched, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And then place on the affected area a cloth soaked in rose oil or in wax; and place it on the sore and instruct the patient to rest. And then let that remain until it softens; and when it is softened, treat it with ointments or another cure until it is healed.
And since they are old and do not respond to that treatment, then you should scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they are moist and remove the scab of pus on top, which hinders healing; and then treat them until they heal.
And then you remove them with a sharp, violent pustule, the first time they grow and are scabbed over; and then treat them until they heal.
Know that almesamir is indeed key and is not so unless it is a red, round rash similar in color to the body, occurring throughout the body but especially in the areas below the feet and elbows, and this pain indicates that you should treat them.
And then it is necessary to cut off what is around the nail, and it should be held with forceps or pliers, and it should be removed from its root; and then heal that part.
And if you wish, cauterize the following part as mentioned in the previous chapter.
But a wart is a small, rough, round growth on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
And its treatment is to stretch and cut it out, or to tighten it with a string or hair so that it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, either with fire or with sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small, soft or rough growth on the surface of the body, mostly on the face, and when cold attacks it, it seems to be bitten by an ant, and it spreads around the body.
And its treatment is to take a reed pen of an owl or a vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole so that the circle of the pen encloses all parts of it; then turn your hand with the pen until you cut off what is around the mole, and press it into the flesh of the face, and remove the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel in the following manner:
And let the top part of the needle be slightly thicker, blunt (meaning it does not pierce), wrapped so that the touch of it is softened and its rotation is controlled.
And if you wish to cauterize, do so according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery for anthrax.
Regarding the instruments used to provide treatment.
Sometimes treatment is done with silver or tin, cast iron or wrought iron; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to those for which they are intended. For the treatment of young children, the instrument should be small; and for those whose buttocks are painful or sore, their treatment instruments should also be small.
The shape of the large and few treatment tools:
The top of the needle to which the bag is attached should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the bag is tied, as shown in the image.
And the end of it, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (meaning not open) and very thin, tapering to a point; and on one side of its length there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and a little wider.
And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep wool are placed, and its size should be one palm.
And let it be punctured by sharp needles as it is rolled up, and if the space between the needles is as thick as a finger.
And then insert strong raw fat into those needles, which should be of the same kind or surround them; and use that to seal the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, tightly close its end between two distinguishing points with a very tight knot, and then cauterize each needle with it. But the method of cauterizing is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance level; and ensure that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs upwards, and place a cushion underneath them, on which there are usually men or a pillow; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then gently insert it into the rectum, and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press it vigorously until all that is in the bag is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bag and let the patient raise their legs to the wall.
Here's my attempt at translating the text:
It looks like the original text is in a language that shares many similarities with Latin and medieval Romance languages like Old Spanish or Occitan. Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts and translate them step by step:
"And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings, then use a very fine and thin needle, like those used to pierce infants' ears.
"Of the treatment of plagues.
"I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the book, and I say here that the cure should be done with hands and medicines according to the patient's condition.
"Therefore, I say that plagues are differentiated according to what causes the plague and where it occurs.
"And the causes for which many times plagues are made are such as a blow from a stone, or a cut with a sword or knife, or a strike with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
"But the plagues that are in certain parts of the body are such as a wound that strikes the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those of the limbs.
"And I will recount the treatment for certain wounds, and you should apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple injury occurs to the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and if the vein has been cut only slightly but it is a large wound and you fear a carbuncle forming on that patient, then take precaution and quickly perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein without delay; and extract from that person as much blood as necessary according to their strength, unless there is some other reason against bloodletting, especially if the amount of blood coming out of the wound is small.
And let the bloodletting be done on the opposite side of the injured area; and ensure that the patient is protected from drafts, and avoid heavy foods and meats.
But if any cause prevents bloodletting, then the patient should be restricted in food and should not approach meat or wine.
And place on the wound, if an abscess forms there, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine that has been mixed with astringent herbs.
But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and air has not changed it, the powder which I will mention soon in detail.
And if the air has already changed that [condition], then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or caused by a sword and has a similar appearance, and its lips are not closely approximated, then close them with stitches according to how I will recommend for the stitching technique.
But if the wound is exposed to the bone and marrow, and there is no retention but only a small fragment, then incise that [area] and promptly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place as best you can. And instruct the patient to be fed with foods that are nourishing: heads and legs of poultry and similar things, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that is rotten and remove it, and then treat it promptly.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it has not been divided by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not cut, then you should incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if what we have said does not work for you, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder over them so that it hardens before the air changes them.
And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part of oil from the pine tree, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of fresh lime; let everything be finely ground and sieved, and fill the wound with it, and bind it well until it adheres to it and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it above with bandages and leave it, and do not unbind it until it is healed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes this alone is enough when there is no pine tree or dragon's blood available to you.
And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and bind them tightly, and these are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not intended for such wounds. Rather, treat them with the water we have mentioned earlier, so that you place digestive ointments on them, or place a paste of wheat flour mixed with water and honey on them until they form a scab; and then treat them with the other remedy until they are healed.
"However, if you encounter a small bone fracture with the wound, then extract it using forceps.
"And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures when they occur.
"About wounds of the neck.
"However, if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
"However, if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is nerves, there is nothing to do except to avoid treating them with something that causes strong astringency, such as alum and vitriol, because they harm the nerves and cause contraction. "And do not place anything on the wound to stop the bleeding, because the substance of the nerves is blood and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most important of all members.
"And if it is treated with light medications, such as being washed with rose water, sometimes infused in rose oil or plain oil, and then wiped when washed with rose water and the other powders according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Here's my translation of the given sentence:
"But if the wound already has a cut artery and there is blood flow, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
"But if the spinal cord or all of it has already been cut and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you should suture the lips of the sheath onto the cane of the penis and do not touch that; first make it equal and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for some days; then treat it with ointments containing astringents and stimulants until it heals.
"But if the wound has already affected the bone, then you should probe it. And if there are bone fragments in it, remove all that you can; and what you cannot extract, leave it until the wound festers, and is separated, and the flesh around it is relieved.
"And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. "But if in the wound there is a fistula, then treat it with water that will be mentioned later in its own chapter.
If the wound is caused by a spear or sword and you see the depth of it, then consider more if there is gas coming out with the patient's breath; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if the wound is not deep and it is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour place powder on it, and do not draw out that [blood] so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the body and returns to the heart and weakens the patient. Instead, place an attractive ointment on it, and wash it off two times a day.
And if the ointment is not present, then place a piece of old cloth in the opening of the wound so that it draws out the moisture from the humors; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the fluid within them flows.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or difficulty in breathing occur to the patient, and you see the other good dispositions of him, then know that the wound is safe; and from then on treat it with compresses and with the other treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of the patient is delayed and always open, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly with its specific remedy.
And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been used for washing before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if the injury has already reached the bone, and if there are pieces of bone torn off, then you should turn the wound to try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let the bone fragments remain until the wound heals, as their removal will be easier.
And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
About the wounds of the belly.
The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
And a small rupture is difficult to repair by any other method, and I know that their reduction is even more difficult if you do not take care of their introduction into their proper place immediately, because it opens and swells, making the operation difficult.
And therefore, a large rupture is better, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that suturing the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for suturing other diseases of the body as well.
And two other sutures are specific to other diseases, but nevertheless are most specific to the suturing of the abdomen.
And I will explain each one to you with an explanation and clarification.
Therefore, I say that when the disease is small and there is any cause of intestinal obstruction through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflated due to the cold air.
And so when it is like this, then you should scrape that area so that you can submerge a sponge or cloth in tepid water alone, or take it in water with squinant, and cyperum, and spice, and embroques, until the swelling has been resolved.
And in some cases this works well, where there is astringency, and it is better for the water alone in the resolution of the swelling.
And so when you see the swelling has been resolved, then you moisturize the area with water in which there is a lot of marjoram and mallow, because by this it is alleviated within him without much effort.
But if the swelling within him cannot be alleviated by this treatment, then cut a small incision with an instrument used to incise hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is suitable that there is no cutting, and there is no need to dry out and weaken.
About the instrument, see its shape:
One part of it is sharp and curved, the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin but not as thin as a spoon, rather it should be blunt to some extent.
And so when the wound is expanded and the intestine comes out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, because that is better.
But when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet of the patient higher than the lower parts.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your intention and consideration on this, so that the part where the wound is located is higher than the other part.
And in this way, you should administer it for both large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And for small wounds, place that which is prepared in this way: make sure the administrator is between your feet, holding the entire disruption with their hand and aligning its edges; then reveal to him any other stitching reason.
This text appears to be discussing a common method of suturing. Let's break it down line by line:
This text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving needles and thread. Here is a line-by-line translation:
And let the needles be moderate between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles cut the flesh very lightly; and coarse ones are difficult to enter the vein, so it is necessary that they be moderate in fineness and coarseness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be placed at both ends of the vein, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound break before its healing.
And do not prolong stitches, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
Then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping; and you shall place upon the stitches powdered flakes from all sides, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound is already healed.
And these methods of stitching with needles are more suitable for small wounds, because in the stitching of one or two needles, or around them.
But the second method of stitching is common: and that is when you use stitches to gather together the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the needle holder, all at once, with a needle on which thread has been wound, moderate in fineness and coarseness.
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
And they know this stitch (or suture).
And with such a stitch I sutured the wound which had occurred on a man's belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and the opening of the wound was greater than one palm, and there had issued from the intestines around two palms of the middle part of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then he lived for many years, and he was in his right mind.
And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it happened by miracle, because I did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but I placed on the wound clean cloths two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I will describe two types of stitches according to the account of Paulus.
And this is how you begin with the stitch of the cord: and you insert the needle from outside to inside.
This text appears to describe a medical procedure involving needles and meridians or channels in the body, similar to some practices in traditional Chinese medicine. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's my attempt at translating the provided sentence:
"And make it penetrate with that, your penetration with which you make it penetrate into the bladder at its opening, so that all of it can enter.
"And then begin from this side of the bladder, and with that, puncture through to the other side of the bladder, and remove the needle from the tube that has penetrated it, and then return that tube back into that opening on the other side of the bladder with this end of the catheter; and then remove that tube which is inside him.
"And do this one time and another, and do it one time after another until you have removed everything that is outside according to that example.
"And the end of this method of stitching is that you sew with skin stitches with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the bladder once from the opening of the tube, and let the other opening be until it is healed.
"But the second type of proper stitching, which they call equally 'Walian', and this is said about it and recommended for it, is that you sew that semi-circularly with which certain physicians sew it, so that they add all the openings to their appropriate places by nature; and apply the end of one opening to the other end of the opening, and this is done as I have told you.
Sure, I'll give it my best shot at translating the given text:
And then you should turn those things around, and make each one penetrate from the inside out to two extreme points on either side of the opposite limb.
And this method of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the word of Gaul
And others may say that ventral suture is done with two needles, so you insert a thread into each one, and begin by introducing the needle from whichever side you prefer, and make it penetrate to the other side following the suturing technique used for those who have their hearts pierced equally.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
However, the judgment of wound treatment is the same as for other wounds.
Which is caused because when you find the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it up decently, then place upon it a carnifying powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it a salve that is in your presence until it forms hard calluses and the threads are consolidated; and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the necessary medicines at hand, then place over it immediately, as soon as it starts to ooze pus, vinegar and water mixed together in equal parts, changing this dressing twice a day until it is healed, because for simple wounds, no other medicine is needed.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to soak a piece of wool in good quality olive oil or rosemary oil and place it around the area between the joints and below the armpits.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in their intestines, because after a few hours it becomes necessary, then cauterize that area with black ebony stiptic, especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the cavity of the intestine.
And know that which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not receive healing from any wound that befalls it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, and their magnitude within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestine, and you manage to find it fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you also reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed into the abdominal cavity and has already turned yellow or black, then you should strengthen that with a thread over the affected area so that blood flow will come out, for in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
And then you should insert that which is another ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the exit of the wound so that upon you there may be relief from the attraction of it for the return of the intestine and the discharge of the arm of the wound.
"Remembrance of the plagues that happen in the intestines.
"When a disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men, as I have seen that one who was wounded in his stomach with a lance thrust and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed an ulcer, and thus he felt pain and bloating.
"Then I pursued the treatment of him already since he was not fully cured, but rather followed a subtle approach to ensure that it would heal and the area would be consolidated.
"And I, seeing that the area was already consolidated, told the patient to expect an unfortunate event in his stomach; and no one expected this unfortunate event, but rather he remained in good health, eating and drinking well, and then entered a bath and performed his tasks.
"And some experienced people say that when there is a wound in the intestines and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: you take ants with large heads; and then you adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants whose mouth is open over the two lips of the wound. Then, when it takes hold of them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
"And then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
"And then return the intestine and close the wound, leaving those attached parts inside until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
"And if possible, bind the intestine with fine thread made from the intestines of an animal attached to it, as it is more like a needle; and you should take the end of these intestinal threads, make it very thin, and then bind the end of it with thread around it, insert that thread through needles, and sew up the intestine with it, returning it into its place.
"And this method of sewing with ants is only a way of trust and hope.
"However, if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is only a thinning and not a complete healing.
"Of the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
"Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes rotten and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not healed or closed at all times, then in any part of the body it is generally called a fistula, and we call this 'zukhem'.
And fistula according to the truth is a hardened and fibrous nodule, white in color, which does not cause pain, and it has a cavity like the cavity of bird feather; and for this reason, that is called alkus rizatz, that is, feather.
Sure, here's a translation of the given text: And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their signs and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
And it is fitting that I should inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is caused by manual operation.
And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body, for of these are fistulas which reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed like the hand and foot; and of these are those which give proximity to the main member and resemblance.
And therefore that of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the most difficult illnesses to heal, and it does not receive treatment, and with it there is work and ignorance.
And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you hope and prepare for its treatment, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, search for it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead probe, because lead with the lightness of its body is easily bent and follows the twists.
And if the fistula has terrible openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe.
Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate this sentence:
And then you should inquire with precision, according to whatever method is possible for you, to determine if there are bones or nerves here. Is it the cavity of a distant or proximate fistula, or is it a fistula whose opening is covered and located above this? Then, with all your strength, skill, and how you question the patient about their illness, you should discover the cause of the pain through pressure with your hand on the area. Similarly, consider the implications and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have considered all these causes with certainty, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: you must consider whether it is an apparent proximate fistula or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or veins, or one of the places I mentioned to you.
Then you must dry out the fistula according to what has been said before in its narrative, and remove whatever is in that discharge and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the opening of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, according to correctness, then you must cut it open as much as possible, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have compressed with iron.
And do this with some vinegar, until the sharp medicine erodes everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula's corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that promote healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal from this, then you should cauterize it according to our recommendations.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should inquire into it and dry it out according to our recommendations, unless there is some obstacle related to a vein, nerve, or major member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will promote healing until it heals.
And if it does not heal and instead throws off pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely removed all the corruption; and therefore, you should re-expose it carefully and thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with the strongest potion you have, and then restore it.
And therefore, if it is healed, then it is good; and if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the deepest part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus your task here is not to heal but only to alleviate it.
And if the bone is slightly corrupted and it is within your power to remove it, then you should do so with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause behind with your strength.
But if any cause of the humidity gives you difficulty, and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh here and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place something on the wound that will keep it open, and leave it until those bones, flesh, and ligaments become softened and decayed, and guard the wound so that it does not heal or close up, and thus the section that you have cut in your operation is constricted.
Furthermore, if you fear that it might close up, place on it a piece of cloth soaked in oil or a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments have softened and the bones are separated from them, then extraction becomes easier.
The sentence can be translated into English as follows:
Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his body, so that you may serve as an example and aid in your operation.
A young man around 30 years old, to whom pain occurred in his chest, and from the inner parts a tumor grew on the innermost part of the body until the tumor reached the chest, and it is a tumor with a large abscess, and there was no external cause.
Then the time was extended with that due to the doctors' mistake until the abscess burst, and foul matter flowed from it, and his treatment was then stopped until the thigh was opened, and there were made in him horrible openings through which all the pus and humors of the body flowed.
And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and none of them knew more than the art until I was called.
And I saw his thigh and the matters that flowed from him through those openings in great quantity; and already the body of that man was all swollen and his color was yellowish.
And then I introduced the probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
And immediately I investigated all the orifices and found that they were open from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised into one of the orifices that I found an exposed part of the bone, which was corrupt, decayed, and discolored; and already a part of the thigh where it had penetrated to the marrow was corrupted.
And then I sawed through what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I believed that it was not in the bone itself, but rather the corruption that I had cut out and sawed off, which I had already removed.
And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I returned and discovered on the bone, following the initial discovery, that there was still corruption with the bone.
And I sawed away what appeared to be that corruption, and then I tried to cure him and restore his health, but it did not work.
And then I discovered another spot on him and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically, and I persisted in his restoration, but it did not heal until I had cut around a palm's width of him, which I extracted with its marrow. Then I restored that part with medicines, and it healed slightly and was cured.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or make an incision in him except for the disposition of his weakness and for his lack of tolerance and fear of death, because he falls into a coma at all times due to excessive evacuation.
Therefore, he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing hard in the place of bone; and good disposition has been made of him in his body, and his strength returns; and he converses according to his dispositions, and neither does he oppose in walking nor suffer any harm for any reason.
But if there is bone protruding in the place of the body that has been wounded, then you should cut it according to this manner: and that is for you to take a ligament and tighten it at the extremity of that protruding bone, and command someone to extend it upward; and place that wool ligament, which is thicker than the first ligament, there; and then tie it over the flesh that is under the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you draw the flesh toward the parts below, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And it is necessary that the stitch be placed little by little on the affected area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, then another stitch should be made at another time.
And if the bone is not prominent but rather flat or continuous with another part, and the corruption is in the middle of the bone or in a part of it, then you should uncover all the skin around; and next place a stick underneath, and next stitch together that first part where the corruption is until the stitches of both parts are connected.
And let the stitch be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, cut open that corrupt joint, and stitch together the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the bone but rather in the tendon.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should investigate how the corruption appears to you, and scrape that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and with each tendon straighten it as much as possible without cutting against a vein or nerve.
And know that there are various types of saws for cutting these bones, and the choice of saw depends on the location, preparation, thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity of the bones; therefore, you should prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for the operation.
And know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument needed; since you have great experience and long practice in the ways of this art, and as you have already encountered various illnesses, you will place what is appropriate from the instruments for each disease.
And I will instruct you at the end of this chapter on the number of instruments that you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed to your decision, which you will practice on others. Method of sawing:
Another way of sawing:
Method for another large saw:
Method of file: Its head should be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points should be arranged like the teeth on a saw.
And it is not appropriate that only with this are the joints massaged when they are corrupt or the opening is very wide.
Smaller form of razor
Lighter form of razor
Other decently made saw form: let it be made in the shape of a bow, with the sharpness of iron, and its wooden parts properly made. Shape of it:
Form of razor that has concavity
Another subtle form of razor
Another form of razor with a curved tip
Small form of razor resembling a tenon
Another smaller form of chisel
Form of another chisel; this one resembles a ray, and its tip is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
A form of file that is suitable for scraping those bones that are pierced.
And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, all the handles that we have said for razors, chisels, and saws are needed.
The translation of the first sentence is: "About the infection of the extremities and the locking of the bones.
The translation of the passage is: "The extremities may become infected due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that infection with those medicines and the treatment does not work, or if sometimes the infection spreads to a member which you do not perceive any cause for, then you must infect that member where the infection occurs, so that the patient escapes from death or major harm to the member.
The translation of the passage is: "And the sign of that which occurs is that the member turns black, as if fire has burned it, or you may see a spreading blackness until the putrefaction reaches into that member and spreads throughout the body; thus, beware of the infection in that.
"Similarly, if the cause of the infection is a poisonous strike from something like a sea scorpion, viper, or similar creature.
The translation of the passage is: "And if the infection or strike is on the tip of the finger, then you should infect the finger and not give space for the infection to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if you access the hand, then you should incise it from the base of the thumb, and do not leave room for corruption until it takes hold in the fire of the arm.
And if you instead incise that one, then cut into the arm to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes and it reaches the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other cause for treatment at this point is futile.
And similarly, do the same with the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise it to one of the joints.
And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it goes up into the shinbone, then you should incise the thigh to the knee joint.
And if the corruption has already spread over the shinbone, then in that case there is nothing to be done except to dismiss [the patient], and leave him to his death.
The method of incising the limb or sawing it is that you should tie a ligature above where you want to make the incision, and place another ligature on the spot; and the assistant should extend a ligature towards the lower parts, and the assistant should also extend another ligature towards the upper part; and you should separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then it can be incised or sawed.
And it is necessary that clean cloth be placed around all parts of the wound to prevent contamination, and to bring about a healthy scabbing and controlled pus formation for the patient.
But if there is bleeding when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then bind the afflicted member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that when such an event happens to a man in his foot, this is the accident which we have described, which occurs because of a burning sensation in his foot as if by combustion from fire.
And that corruption begins first in the toe before spreading to the entire foot.
And then that man would prepare for himself a poultice to go to the member with great force, and he would cause that foot to rot until the joint, and it was healed.
A long time later, the same corruption happened to him in the big toe of his left foot.
And then he came to me, and I was determined to draw out that excess with water that I placed on the hand of medicines, for the cleansing of his body; but the excess did not draw out, and it began to go to the other toe of his left foot.
And he asked me to cut his hand off, and I did not want to do that, fearing the repercussions of that excessiveness, and also because I was afraid of the death of the patient, for the strength of the patient was on the decline.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and word came back to me that that man had his entire hand cut off and was healed.
And I have recounted this story only to be helpful in regard to this affliction and that it may serve as an indication by which it may be recognized and treated accordingly.
On the care of the sinews and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point where it collects pus, and then it bursts and is perforated, and the pus exits from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is also thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption has reached it, and it does not press on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula. iety
"However, if the space is prolonged until corruption takes hold in some part of the body, it is then called a fistula and not ulcer.
"And the treatment for it is that you should introduce a cord or string entirely like this, especially when it is made thin and shaped like cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the affected area due to its corruption.
"However, if you hope that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and the cord has a smooth surface, then treat it with an enema.
"And consider the groin, and if it is large and the arm has an unpleasant odor, then treat it with an enema made of Egyptian medicine, which consists of oil, vinegar, and honey, mixed in equal parts in a vessel, heated over a fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
"And then you take from it the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat the groin with that mixture, strengthening its opening, and leave the medicine in place for two hours.
And then extract it with contempt; and do this for so many days until the wound is cleansed and the smell removed.
And sometimes it is administered an enema with ash water, when this remedy is not at hand; and you must take the ash of grapevines, put it in water, then use that to administer the enema until you are certain that the wound has stopped bleeding.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian remedy or the ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed together, and after that administer another enema with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are certain that the wound has stopped bleeding, then administer an enema with water that promotes flesh growth in it.
And you should take some ointment of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or you can administer an enema with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the anus is too narrow to admit the cannula for the enema, then gradually widen it with a small iron instrument, and place in it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilic ointment until it is widened enough.
And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then apply a stitch to its lips and leave it in place for as long as needed for the enema without adding anything.
And if the orifice from which the arm extends is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it with a poultice in the lowest place of it so that the arm may run below, because when the arm is compressed at the anus, flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the anus within the environment of the hip bone as you wish, then prepare the member with a preparation that allows the arm to pass through lightly as is apparent to you and that there is in it no obstruction to the arm.
Based on the context and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence: And so that you may know if what comes out of his arm is too much or too little, or whether it is digested or undigested.
And thus you should also consider the location of that vein, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that has been applied to the opening of the vein begins to adhere or nearly adheres, then on the second or third day, you should remove it or loosen it, and when you uncover the wound, change the bandage for a new one and apply fresh ointment.
However, if from the vein a little space is left empty and fine pus escapes, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it is near, because there are some men in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and others in whom the opposite happens.
And if from the vein after many days undigested blood comes out, you should know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you must adapt the medicine towards drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and power, they become dry like diachylon ointment when superfluous addition of wax is made to it.
And the most effective treatment is to take diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and then apply it generously on the patient's affected area, and then cover it with cloth, and use it in that manner.
And when there is no ointment available, do the following: take myrrh, aloe, and sesame seeds, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey that has been heated on the fire; then place a cloth soaked in this mixture over the affected area; and also apply the honey that you have heated until it becomes thick, spread it over a cloth and place it firmly over the wound.
And sometimes, certain long and thin herbs such as celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and centaury are administered with it, and use these simple or compound drugs: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the honey that you have collected; and use it.
And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its depth, and now make an investigation in the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; then treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
Here is a line-by-line translation of your provided text:
Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And so, when you have that water which we mentioned in the division and do not proceed with your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the remaining superfluity from the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is raw and the nail is healthy, and the excess of the nail already presses the flesh into the parts inside, and begins to prick and hurt it, then it is necessary for you to place a subtle ray underneath the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up and easily incise that flesh, and place on what remains of the flesh medicines that are burning corrosives until everything is removed; and afterwards cure that with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary for you to incise that bone and remove it, because it will not heal as long as there is a corrupt bone within it.
And if you see that the corruption and the rot are spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to where its memory is most prominent, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
Based on the text you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical terminology, here's a line-by-line translation:
Sure, here is the translation of the given text:
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or it is their birth in some nodes of those mentioned. But he who is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and this one who is born in the joints grows very ill.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is lighter, and it is that you must make a longitudinal cut along its root with a lancet.
But of him who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of his suppuration.
But in him who is born in the finger at the nodes, it is necessary that you make an initial incision of the flesh with a round cut towards the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable needles for this purpose, and then cure it so that it may be healed.
But the consolidation that happens to the said nodes whether by birth of man in this way or by scarring from a wound or burn or by similar causes, then it is necessary to cut through this consolidation until the nodes return to their natural form.
And then place between them linens soaked in rose oil to prevent easy consolidation, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the said part with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
From an incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins full of melancholic excess that often appear in the limbs of the body, with the most common occurrence being in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and bearers.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a purgative of black bile to the body several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But the treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and drawn out, that black blood; and the other method is that the vein be raised up and completely removed.
The incision of it is according to this method: at the beginning, soak the leg with hot water until the thick blood, which is sludge from the leg, is dissolved; then bind the patient's leg to the upper part of the thigh, between the knee and the groin, with a bandage. Then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide cut, and then raise the black blood with your left hand from the lower part of the leg upwards and downwards, until the desired amount and as much as is needed for the patient's good health has been taken out.
And then bind it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
But their elevation should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on him, first shave him; then put his leg in a bath and immerse it in hot water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if he is to be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, do so until the member is scratched.
Then dry the string on the right side of the vein by cutting it in the length or behind him you will find the kidney, or lower down you will find the ankle.
Then open the string with scissors and completely strip the vein until it appears to the touch, and it is at this point that you will see a darker hue approaching.
And thus when you remove the string and from it you see that white thread, it should be a cord.
Then place it underneath so that it is lifted and freed from the string, and suspend it with an empty needle.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
And do this: remove that which is the most superior or highest part of all sections until it has been completely removed; and then incise that area.
And if you cannot remove and elevate it, then insert a double-threaded needle with a strong cord and ligate it, or insert underneath it the thread and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful not to cut it; because if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to elevate that part and it will come back on the patient causing harm.
And when that part has been completely expelled, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and both olive oil and non-olive oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has twisting at which it is folded in parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along that part of the twisting on it and at the folding places of it, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift all of it.
And you must be careful with your cut that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, because it will be difficult for you to lift it; and keep your skill in this.
The form of the incident with which the life is dried out (or "with which life has been dried out").
It is not directed at the joints as with fingers nor does it have an acute end to avoid damaging the vein; and it has a thick flexibility like a lion's, because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; they are in excessively large amounts on him, just as we said.
Of the extraction of the calf vein (or "veins of the leg/lower limb").
This vein is produced in the lower legs, as well as in al-Ateg (a place in Arabia) and in the dry and arid lands of India, where there are few trees, no grass, or any other vegetation.
It is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction, which comes out of the colon like poison within the body of snakes, worms, scorpions and maggots that generate between the colon and the flesh.
And the sign of the acceptance of its coming is that this vein appears in the leg with a very intense inflammation; and immediately the area swells; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, appearing as if it were cut by a blade.
And then when the extremity emerges from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a weight of lead which weighs one or two pounds, and tie it so that the lead hangs from the thigh.
And as many times as you draw anything out of him for any reason, wrap it in lead and tie it up. And if it is prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut it straight until it has been drawn out, for if you cut it straight, it constricts and enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus in that place and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary that it be pulled gently and gradually until it is completely removed from him, and that nothing remains in his body.
And this vein is drawn out in some men to a length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has come to me that one was drawn out of twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into its wound and pierce it with a long incision through the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, particularly when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes to each orifice, and exits from every orifice branch.
And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and with that which has been mentioned above.
About the cutting of worms generated under the skin, and it is called "bovine illness".
This illness is called in some lands "bovine illness" because it often happens to cattle and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through all the body, ascending and descending, and shows its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors, just like worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the eye, then it quickly blows up in it and enters and destroys the eye, and this often happens.
Therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, do not do so unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you have something above it and something below it with a strong bandage and constriction, and then dry it out on top and extract it.
And if it is inflamed in the flesh and you do not find anything there, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until death, and the main cause to be feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the eye, then strengthen the eyelid with a strong ligature, and dry it out, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purifying remedies for their body with medicines that evacuate putrid humors, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
About the incision for pain in the nose.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and it also changes from member to member.
And I have seen this as I will now tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been cut for an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm going upward, but more slowly than a worm, as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
And then the pain will go away from that place and enter into the muscle, and here it stays for about an hour.
And then it moves to another part of the body until it reaches the other arm.
And then I realized that it was circulating throughout the entire body, just as I had seen; and I was greatly amazed at the changes in him and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another. And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have rarely seen others whose pain is transferred from limb to limb. But I did not see it in the same way with the feet as in the woman.
And I did not think it was anything other than that the woman was old, with dry body and open veins, and in this way she felt that wind moving around.
And it is necessary that this should not appear as a result of treatment in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with closed veins.
And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent in the foot as we have said; then you should strengthen that [area] and gently and carefully press on it until that constricted wind has come out, and cauterize the area.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity lies in those that have large tips, small ones, concave, blunt, solid; and those with three angles; and those with tongues; and those with spikes.
And the signs of imminent death are when an arrow strikes someone and passes through the bone and exits from the fontanelle which is on top of the brain; for it causes severe headache, visual disturbance, vertigo, burning in the eyes, swelling and burning of the tongue, convulsions and clouding of consciousness, vomiting of bile, and a weak and severed speech, and white fluid similar to dust issues from the wound site, and the patient resembles someone with edema of the flesh.
When you see these signs, then you should abstain from the treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
However, the signs of an arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you can feel that it is stuck in something hard, not something soft; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, and black blood comes from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foul smell, and fainting; and thus you know that death approaches without doubt.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are foaming blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the patient's color changes, and there is rapid breathing or a strong desire to breathe cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is near the feet, then the pain is near the lower ribs, and there is great difficulty breathing with intense pain and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles do not move well.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound very quickly.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is lodged in the patient, check for any opening or tear in the wound, such as the skin, tissue, or intestines that may be damaged, and do not expect a cure unless you remove the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine is exiting from outside of the patient, and there is any sign of infection or swelling in the surrounding area, and the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that it is fatal.
However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, armpits, spine, collarbone, ribs, thighs and their respective parts of the body can be saved according to greater dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisoned.
I recommend this to you because I have seen the effect of these arrows, so that you may understand the treatment accordingly.
The cause of this is that in one man, an arrow struck his lacrimal duct near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the arrowhead in his ear canal, and he was cured without any harm to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, just below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron lion on which there were no feathers.
And the Jew died, and it did not happen to him from a bad wound.
And another arrow was extracted from a Christian man, which had been shot into his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with feathers; and then I cut along that between two bones, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I was very careful with it, and I immediately extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And another arrow was extracted from a man who had been struck in the belly, and I thought he would die from it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I cut along the arrow and pulled it out, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years, the arrow came out by itself through the flesh of the body.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had stuck in her belly, and the wound is healed inside, and it has not changed its position, and the woman does not suffer harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his face and the wound is healed and the arrow is broken, not finding any pain here, and this has similar symptoms.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's man who was stuck in the middle of his nose and had already deviated slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to care for him immediately after the arrow entered three days ago.
And then I found the arrow wound very narrow; and then I examined it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt pain below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I covered the area with a plaster containing attracting and digestive virtues, intending that the place swell up so that the location of the arrow appears to me, so that it can be cut over it.
And do not assume that the accident in that place is significant because an arrow has reached that place; and I continued with the plaster over him for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound was healing in the meantime, and the patient was recovering from the extraction for many days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me this.
And then I applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I searched for that, and found the subtle tip of the arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible to me, and it took four months for this to happen.
And then because the wound was widened, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and they remained there without coming out, I did not cease trying and inventing on that with various devices until one day I began to pull it out with a properly made forceps, as will be shown in the form of those at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound has healed, and the patient is cured completely, with no aftereffects whatsoever.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, so that you may apply this rule and significance to what has not been said, for the divisions of this art and their definitions are not understood by simple narration nor do they comprehend those who read the books.
And wise craftsmen compare with few words; and that which is present with that which is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of the strange causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they have entered except according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the contrary of the other side.
And that which is thrown by the place where it has entered, or is an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place, and it is pulled out and expelled.
And if it does not obey the extraction in the hour when it falls, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are eased.
And similarly, if the point is placed in the bone and does not obey you by coming out, then leave it there for a few days and apply a drawing and moistening ointment to it each day, until it comes out.
And if it does not obey you by coming out after some days, then you must pierce around the tip of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine probe until the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
"However, if the arrow is already embedded in the body and is hidden from feeling, then you should investigate with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with suitable instruments for its extraction.
"And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins here, then cut around the wound until it is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
"And if there are bones on which the arrow is lodged, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides as much as you can; and manage to extract it by evading the fracture of the bones and their twisting until it comes out.
"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow from any place it is located, then use with twisting of your hand and forceps from all sides until it yields; and be cautious with great caution so that the arrow is not broken and that you make the difficult extraction as easy as possible.
"And if you cannot extract it at that moment, then leave it for some days until the surrounding parts can be softened, and then try again when it has become more relaxed. "But if there is opposition due to blood flow, then administer what has been said about treatment in its respective chapter.
"And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or cord; administer cold in any way possible to relieve the arrow's sting; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness, as I have recommended to you.
"And thus, perform the opposite of what the arrow does, so that the patient is in a position similar to the one in which they were shot with the arrow, because this is more beneficial. "But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the patient's condition.
"But the arrows that are thrown from one side to another, or if any part of them protrudes outwards, or if the tip of the arrow is bent due to the pressure of the protruding part above the fletching, then you should cut it off at that point; and the cutting should be according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; and then pull it out, because it comes out easily.
If the arrow is lodged in the bone, then you twist it according to its opposition until the arrowhead presses into the bone, and expand yourself in the process, and then remove it.
Otherwise, leave it there for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then you push it out with it.
But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer an impulse, then you insert something concave into it, such as a spoon or similar instrument, so that its convexity enters the rear of the arrowhead, and then push it out with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument that enters it, because the arrow is weakened by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh in which the venom is located, if it is possible to do so, and then treat the wound with an appropriate remedy.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is accessible so that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and be careful not to sever a vein or nerve, and remove it, and then close the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
"A type of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
"Their tips are like the beak of a bird, made with serrations, and when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
"And from these [forceps] are made various instruments, large, few, and slender, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, as well as the extent of the wound and the constriction caused by it.
"like a fishhook, so that its insertion into the concave arrow is made easier and it is extracted with it.
"About the bloodletting of veins.
"The veins commonly used for bloodletting are XXX, of which there are XVI in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, known as auricularis; two veins that run on each temple; two veins that run along the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called ophthalmic; one vein located in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip—these are known as labial—and there are two veins under the tongue. This text appears to be discussing different veins and their locations in the body, specifically those found in the arms. Here's a line-by-line translation:
This text appears to be discussing the veins in the foot and leg (camba). Here's a line-by-line translation:
The treatment for the veins near the ears is for ancient cataracts, migraines, and old head wounds.
And the manner of bleeding these veins is as I have told you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the top of the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are located, with a broad cloth and good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage until the two veins and their locations appear near the ears on the two depressed areas of the head; and you will seek that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, this is a sign.
Then you take the scalpel, and it is the one that cuts, and then you insert it under the vein at the hollow of the bone until the phlebotomist comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the hollow above the parts and cut the vein with a cutting incision. And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and allow as much blood to flow out as you want.
And then strengthen with poultices and leave it there until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, I have described their incisions and cauterizations.
But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the aid of phlebotomy is for chronic migraine and sudden blindness, and sharp acute flows to the eyes.
And the method of bleeding these is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck with one hand until the two veins appear clearly to the touch, and demonstrate their pulse under your finger; then you may proceed with caution.
And then you raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy knife underneath, and lift the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your necessity.
And then loosen the bandage from the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultice on it, and strengthen it with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
And already preceded is the reminder of them, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is similar to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the manner of bloodletting is as I have advised you: the patient should grasp their head with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument, called a fleam, which looks like this:
Place the tip of the fleam at the top of the vein and strike it with the handle or another suitable object, allowing the blood to flow according to the desired amount. Then remove the instrument from the patient and hold the area until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad bloodletting instrument, but the bloodletting instrument should not be too sharp at the tip like other instruments; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and you should perform the bloodletting along the transverse direction, because the bone is close to the surface and easily broken by a fine instrument.
"But the treatment for the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes, due to itching of the eye from heat and pus, is for eye diseases.
"And the method of bloodletting is for the patient to hold their head with a bandage, then proceed to bleed them, and you should be standing over their head.
"And the bloodletting should be done according to the width of the vessel with a little more length, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the vessel is thin, it is very likely that its end will break.
"And then let the blood run as much as is necessary for you, and press on that vein, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
"But bloodletting from the nose vein is suitable for acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and heat in the face, especially when it is chronic.
"And the method of bloodletting for this is that the patient should hold their head and then you take their nose with your left hand, choose a fine, long lancet, place it in the middle of the top of the nose according to its direction, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Certainly! Let's translate the given text into English step by step:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of the given text:
And then proceed to perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a small phlebotome, gradually; and then extract blood according to the required amount or as necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then release the ligature and strengthen both veins with a tighter one to prevent the patient from being overwhelmed; leave it for the night until the wound is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy on the prominent veins is that it helps to treat small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, as well as gum disease, ulcers, and fissures; it also heals ulcers present in the nose and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those [veins] is that you make the patient sit before you and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication of each is by their blackness, and this is because in the vicinity of those [veins] are small black veins; and then cut each one with an incising cut.
But if there is doubt about which one to choose and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision on the larger and more apparent of the two.
And make a cut similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
But the two veins that are below the tongue are also used for the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for precautions that are in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula and mouth.
And the way to bleed those veins is to follow the patient's tongue between your fingers in front of the sun, lift up their tongue, and look under the tongue; from one side will come one vein, and from the other side another vein, and each one's color inclines towards blackness.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to cut your hand while bleeding those veins, because below them are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the elbow are those that are common to all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either they place with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive at subtleness; or with the cutting flebotomy knife, which is called alnessil, and this is its form:
It should be done as many times as necessary, and it is suitable for opening the large, full veins that are clearly visible and contain thick, impure blood.
And this venesection is of smaller size and more subtle at the end, suitable for venesection of fine veins that contain thin yellow blood.
However, the benefit of venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws blood from patients with dropsy or jaundice, and also from those who have swollen feet or a distended abdomen.
And it is appropriate for the venesector to be very careful and to exercise caution during this venesection, because there is an artery underneath it. If he errs in the puncture of the vein, he will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this venesection with a pointed lancet, but rather should first incise it with a knife.
And if the basilica does not appear due to obvious swelling, then it is necessary for you to leave that one and move to another, or seek any branch of it; or perform a phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and afterwards perform a phlebotomy on the other side as well, just as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then it is necessary to touch the area in front of the constriction of the arm until you recognize the pulse point; and then mark over it with a pen; and then tie the arm and immediately cut the vein with a concave section, performing phlebotomy on the other side as well, just as we have said; and be careful that the incision is not too close to the artery.
And when you see that upon tightening the ligature, there is swelling in the place marked with ink, then this swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow from the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and then quickly place your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the bleeding has stopped, because many times it stops, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And keep watch over the patient's discharge, and be attentive to him and do not move him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut, and there is no medicine available, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood has been cut off. Or take a tourniquet of cloth, make that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the vein with a tight bandage and pulp until the next day.
And then if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then cure him with water of which the memory of the place of the powder cutting off the blood flow has been recalled.
And the cutting off of his blood is difficult in many ways because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of damaging the arm.
But phlebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous because it draws blood from the upper part of the head down to the torso; this is due to its being composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
If the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
The benefit of bleeding the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with eye disorders.
In this case specifically, if you want the bloodletting to be done with an olive-shaped or a myrtle-shaped fleubotomi; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch any artery or nerve.
However, it is very light in some people when they are not bled on the first percussion, but do not touch that swelling afterwards.
The first thing is that you should know that bloodletting is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution to prevent illnesses, and that it should be done on one of the veins in the elbow, which are: cephalic, dark and basilic; and that bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before a meal, when there are signs of fullness.
And let a bloodletting be performed on the third day or within the first three hours of the morning.
But bloodletting that is administered must be done when it is convenient and necessary, whether at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not advisable to bleed a child until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only be bled between the fourth and seventh month, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled in any way, it is advisable that they cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a cleansing enema, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities of the purified intestines in the bloodletting, which are harmful and can affect the main members.
And patients with certain diseases should not be bled: nausea, drunkenness, or those who are recovering from illness or intoxication until it has left them, nor those with dropsy; and bloodletting should especially be avoided during colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, increased coitus, labor, fasting exercises, vigils, and any cause that weakens the vital force, whether of the body or soul.
And then carefully consider in subtlety of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is suitable for them.
And then enter a bath if nothing prohibits it, or exercise with some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
And perform phlebotomy on him around midday, specifically during the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And ensure that the feet of this patient are protected on that day from all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily discomforts, such as work and excessive fatigue, and sexual activity and similar things.
And at his bedside, have present the causes in the use of which it is customary for men to use aromatics and fragrances, and balms, and similar things according to their ability.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then remove the patient's arm and rub it with his hand, the phlebotomist, two or three times; and then tie the bandage tightly with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the stricture be tempered, for if the stricture is not equal or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body from evacuating blood.
And for the stricture, it is necessary that he who must be phlebotomized should rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and can be easily felt.
And the phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy tool with a little appropriate oil; and he should place his left index finger on that vein, in the area where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein swells a little and the pulsation is calmed. For of the veins is the one which you should flee when performing phlebotomy, and this is the one filled with windiness. When you place the phlebotomy tool on it, it contracts; you should not perform phlebotomy on this vein, and if you do, it is too narrow.
Therefore, for this reason the phlebotomist should be skilled and attentive to all these considerations.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
"And if the location is filled with pus or the patient is feverish, then you should leave it for one day or two without touching the bandage, because strongly pulling on a pus-filled wound will cause pus to come out forcefully and will not enter the bath.
"And then perform bloodletting if necessary.
"And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then perform bloodletting in that vein according to what is correct and appropriate, and adjust the opening a little. Do this quickly before the wound becomes filled with pus, for in many men, a small opening is sufficient.
"But if you see that it is already filled with pus, then do not cut into it, for it does not need any further cutting; and place on it a piece of linen cloth soaked in oil, because this alleviates the body from blood. "And it is better in this case to use olive oil than other types of oil.
"And similarly, apply a piece of linen cloth soaked in oil to every bloodletting where you are bleeding the veins to prohibit the body from losing too much blood, and place theriac, alfadoc, or sage over it after applying one of these to the wound, because the blood becomes thinner and is better when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled except for this time, or upon the opening of the vein a little, then you cut and place over the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and keep it there for one hour, because it dissolves.
And let him do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or another one.
And if some darkness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, place over it some aloe and myrrh dissolved in water, or some mint juice or calamine, or something similar to that.
And often these abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you find softness, keep your compression on it, because that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to place over it any water-based remedy we have mentioned, for the blood will flow strongly from the artery.
And make a plaster with water in which there is an astringent property, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their virtue and according to the predominant color of the blood that appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it run out until it turns red; and likewise if you see it thick, then you let it run out until it becomes thin; and likewise if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has the need to extract blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be made wide and the incisions be large.
And in someone who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary for him to extract blood in many times, and that the wound be narrow.
And the best practice in venous phlebotomy is that it should be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur, you should perform phlebotomy. It is necessary that you prepare the patient before phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in vinegar or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood three or four times.
And if there is a chill from a cold, then before phlebotomy take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in strongly scented aromatic syrup.
And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and the cause is loss of much blood, then it is necessary to give to drink a mixture of meat water and strongly scented syrup; use aromatics with aloe, and anoint their feet with it.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And whoever wants to extend their arm and dissolve their blood slowly, it is necessary for the one whose phlebotomy is for great evacuation and whose strength is weak, that they should let out the blood little by little, according to the strength of the patient in continuous days.
"But whoever wants to try his arm and throw out his blood again, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
"But whoever wants to draw blood from the opposite side of where they are inclined, it is necessary that this be done on the second or third day.
"But in a body where much blood has already been removed and it is weakened and causes fever, it should be drawn again once and in great quantity, and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs, since you will have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and you should place your hand on his pulse to prevent death instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
"And it is not necessary that when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after having already closed the orifice of the vein and made it difficult for the blood to come out, that you press with great force and slightly bend the arm, because this is too bad.
"Have the patient lie down until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remain with the acuity of the coagulated blood in the vein's orifice; or place on it theriac aloe, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity prompts you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them in that same spot or in another vein in the other arm.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when these are not found or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient put their hand in hot water until the needle reddens and the vein appears clearly.
And then it should be tightened with a ligature of fine string; and then phlebotomize according to the small transverse vein, not longitudinally or along its length.
And let the opening be wide and your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that spot on the joint of the hand be small.
And if the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have achieved your necessity.
If you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and the same is done with the body in hot water during wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves below it.
And the phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is suitable for liver ailments.
And the way to perform this phlebotomy is by tightening the hand with a ligature or your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water until the vein is swollen and well visible; then make an incision across it; if you do not get enough blood from that, it will not matter.
And be careful not to cut your hand with the phlebotomy, because below that are the nerves of the fingers exposed without flesh.
Then immerse the hand again in hot water and let the blood run out of it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and its flow will be blocked.
And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not become clotted easily; and similarly, you should do this for every narrow branch [vein].
But the benefit of bloodletting on the left arm is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the bloodletting of the other [arm] as you have done with the first one.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, and retention of menses, and skin and old ulcers on the thighs, and similar diseases.
And the method of bloodletting from there is that the patient should place their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then tie a band around the ankle; and where the vein becomes visible, you should make incisions with sharp words [knife].
And therefore, bloodletting from the largest vein below the knee is best and safest.
Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence:
"And summon the bloodletting expert.
"But if the expulsion of blood is forbidden, then you immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
"And if the bloodletting expert errs in the first attempt, then you should try again with a little bit of bloodletting, for the place is healthy; and do not fear the patient's cunning, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
"And similarly, do with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
"And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the heel and behind the wild part of the leg.
"And the benefit of bloodletting from that patient is to alleviate hip pain when it is due to cold blood.
"And the quality of the bloodletting from that patient is that you have the patient enter a bath, and hurry and strengthen his thigh with four threads on a long, fine bandage over the heel, for it appears only like this.
"And when it appears, then you bloodlet that according to each method that is possible for you and according to the direction, which is better; or you incise that by incision or dry that by cauterization, because the place of him is healthy.
And it is very common in many men; and if you find this condition, and it does not affect the whole body, then some people call it fleubotoma, which appears on the back of the foot between the so-called auricular and anular.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run in the desired quantity.
Then carefully release the constriction and place on the site of the fleubotoma a bandage and strengthen the area, for it is easily healed.
About bloodletting and the qualities to use them.
Bloodlettings are with horns, or iron, or glass.
And bloodletting is done in two ways: one is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
And this bloodletting that is without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
And in the places where bloodletting is administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body: one of which is called alnocrati, and it is in the last part of the head; and the middle location of two parts of the neck together; and bloodlettings under the chin below the jaw bone; and bloodletting of two little fingers; and bloodletting of the little finger, which is at the end of the hand; and bloodletting of two thumbs, which are in two arms; and bloodletting of two big toes; and bloodletting of two thighs.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
"But if the necessity arises for venesection due to illness or as a routine measure, administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month, and at any time.
"And therefore, when any of these conditions are observed, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then venesection should be performed, preferably after two or three hours have passed since dawn.
"And the venesection from the neck is useful because when it reduces heaviness in the head and relieves pressure on the eyes; but it is important that this also be an evacuation of the entire body.
And this puncture is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it should not be used on those who have a fever or are suffering from catarrh, because it will cause great harm to them.
And therefore it is not advisable to use this on the elderly or on those whose heads are severely afflicted.
But if the person who is being treated with it continues to experience forgetfulness, then you should instruct the person applying the cupping glasses to remove their hand slightly from the cupping glass at intervals, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But the cupping of alcohol is in the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilic vein; and therefore you will alleviate asthma, and constriction of breath, and splitting of the lung tissue, and coughing, and chest congestion.
And it is advisable to remove the alcohol cupping glass slightly, because if it is left in place, it will cause weakness in the body and stomach.
And the cupping of alhagdahan will benefit from accidental headaches and opthalmia (eye inflammation), and migraine, and photophobia (sensitivity to light), and toothache; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.  (Note: "alhagdahan" may refer to a specific type of cupping or herbal treatment not well-known today.)
And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter not to press his hand with too much force during scarification, so that he does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And for bloodletting, you should put alcohol on the chin, and in case of gum disease or similar conditions in the mouth, place them in the area designated for phlebotomy of those who are on both lips.
However, bloodletting performed with both spatulas should be administered with caution, which is done to increase warmth.
And bloodletting of the two parts within the eyes should be considered as the phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, fusca and cephalic, because this attracts the blood from all those more prominent veins in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until it reaches the attraction of the three veins.
And command the bloodletter not to proceed too much in scarification, because the place is bare of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain there.
And it is a bloodletting with which one lets blood over the ankles, and it is considered for hemorrhoids of the anus and for ulcers below them.
And it is necessary to command the ventozador that there be a large ventoza, and that it be made of clay, for the affected area requires strong dryness; and delicate ventozas are not effective, so it should be scarified with scarification.
However, ventozas on the thighs should be made more carefully, as they draw blood from the entire body, and this can aggravate old pains of the kidneys, bladder, womb, and uterus; they can also induce menstruation, which can cause discomfort and faintness. They are used in place of phlebotomy on the two veins near the ankles and wrists, as well as on the two humors.
Nevertheless, they weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many men.
The treatment for the veins near the wrists is similar to the treatment for the veins of the two thighs.
And the quality of the positioning of the ventozas is that you should place the ventoza at the beginning of the vein and draw with moderate suction, not prolonging the position of the ventozas, but rather placing them lightly and keeping them constantly in place, so that the humors may come to the area through gradual adaptation. And do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the area turn red, swell, and the heat of the blood appear.
And then scarify and perform suction little by little, and afterward consider the condition of the body.
Because a man with delicate and sparse flesh should be scarified only once to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
And command the cupping practitioner to widen the scarification and probe a little, then perform the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify two times, because in the first incision the way for the blood's subtlety and its moisture is opened. But in the second one, it is a search for the complete extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dark, then let the scarification be done a third time to achieve the last (remaining blood).
Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or just a small amount, one incision is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should make many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions.
And in the act of scarification, the depth should only be that of a cord (rope).
And if the vein of that person is large, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, it is necessary that the places for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentle, opening, resolving oils; if it is in the summer, such as aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or camomile oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or St. John's wort oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is large and fierce, then use oil of amaranth, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
But if the person has wide pores and tender skin, it is necessary to refrain from using oil, and it is advisable for this person that before cupping therapy, the areas of the cups be washed with rose water or strong vinegar water, or chamomile water, or borage water, and similar ones.
And that person whose blood is of high humidity, wash his wounds with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those [methods].
And that person whose superfluidities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or with water of savory (which is marjoram), or a decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar [substances].
And it is necessary that the wound be covered before bathing; it is also necessary to administer [treatment] immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep near the wound.
What should be done before cauterization in a patient who has undergone bloodletting?
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the patient or the person who must be bloodletted is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, it is necessary for them to take cooling substances, such as tart green apples, endive with vinegar, lettuce, sorrel, syrup of roses, and similar things.
And let their food be thus: with pulses, and the meat of small birds, and foods seasoned with sharp [tastes], and similar things.
And regarding the one whose illness is acute, it is necessary for them to drink a syrup made of almiva or syrup from hemp seeds, sumac, and fragrant hyssop between vinegar and honey; and it should be advised that they use little drinking and eating, and their food should exclude pollen, cannabis, peppers, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, drinking should be greater than eating.
And it is necessary that in certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, some men should be given theriac alpharac or musk medicine, whether it is nutmeg or mace, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and they should not take that cold drink.
But the bloodletting that is without scarification should be placed on the liver, and over the spleen and gout, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the bladder of the ankle, because these members cannot tolerate scarification on them.
And it is not desired for anything other than drawing blood from a member, just as a cupping glass is placed on the breast in illness of nosebleed; and they use this so that a thick, viscous gas in the member is dissolved, just as a cupping glass is placed on the stomach and navel; because this rarefies the member, cools it, and relieves pain by resolving the gas.
Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And similarly, when it is placed on the liver and spleen to remove the gas trapped within them.
And these ventoses are applied with suction alone; some are applied with fire.
And sometimes they are applied full of warm water in cases of spleen disease.
And this is why the ventose should be filled and made larger; it should contain only hot water or water with appropriate medicinal herbs added to it.
Form of ventose administered with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and let the quantity of air inside be half a palm's length; and let it be placed on the back, in the lumbar region, halfway down the back, with a small hole through which a needle can pass.
It should be made of tin or lead, with thick, smooth, and even edges, so that it does not disturb the position of the member on which it is placed.
And in the middle of it, there should be a transverse iron or steel rod, where the candle with fire is placed.
And this ventose should be much larger than the one we have described earlier, and somewhat smaller depending on the illness and condition of the person using it.
And the leeches for infants and the weak are different from those used for youths and robust people.
And the method of placing this leech with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with decent firewood in front of a few beeswax candles, and place it in the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the leech, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
Then place it on the limb of the patient, and the finger should be on the hole we mentioned earlier, until when we have the leeches and do not need to remove the finger and let the steam escape over that hole, then the leech will soon dissolve.
And you should ignite the cloth according to its nature, and repeat this process if necessary.
But in the case of a leech used to treat pleurisy, it is done with water, in which there is neither a crossbar nor a hole, and it is not administered until it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is how it looks: This leech, the larger it is, the better, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
It looks like you've provided only a chapter number ("Capitol .xcvii."), which translates directly to "Chapter XCVII" in English. This simply indicates that what follows is part of Chapter 97 of the text.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And the quality of using those bloodsuckers which you have found in the muddy waters of stagnant ponds.
And then let them be placed day and night in muddy water until they become sluggish, and that there is no longer any cause left in their bellies; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping glasses; and then rub the patient's limbs until they redden; and then place them on the patient.
And when they are full and have completed their task.
And if possible, suck out the affected area with a cupping glass, it is more effective in helping.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and warm water; and then rub it and press it.
And if the patient's body continues to bleed near where the leeches were applied and this is what follows, then you should dip a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the area until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is profuse, then sprinkle vitriol powder or other hemostatic substances over it until the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad beans on the area and leave them there until the beans stick to the area and the bleeding stops.
And it is necessary, if required, the use of blood-sucking leeches when it is possible to apply them.
And if the use of leeches is forbidden due to their suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be placed in the area until blood comes out; and immediately they should be applied, because when they sense any blood they will attach very quickly.
And when you want them to detach, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash on them, and they will fall off immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of broken bones and dislocations that have occurred in the bones.
Oh, son, know that ignorant doctors and common people boast about this chapter, those who at any time have not respected the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And because of this, the method of the learned in our land is neglected; and I have not forgotten this at any time for anything; and I have not added anything to it except through the length of study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding until I extracted the science from them.
And then I directed my efforts towards study and experimentation throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experiments have passed; now I have shortened it for you others and relieved you of the burden of length; I have shortened it to the end of brevity, and shown it to the end of explanation, and formed many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, of which the knowledge is necessary before we begin to recall the members broken and diverse in each one. Therefore, let us say in the preamble of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which at the beginning the craftsmen are compelled and stand firm on the truth of those; it is you and others who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
And so I say that when any fracture, dislocation, twisting, or fall occurs, it is necessary for you to begin with bloodletting or cupping that person, or both at the same time, unless some cause prevents it, such as weakness of virtue, or if it happens to a child, an old person in decay, or during very hot weather, or very cold weather.
And then let the patient be content with a diet of fresh herbs and small birds or crabs; we prohibit large meats and overeating, as well as all foods that clog the veins with blood, until you are certain that the abscess has been cauterized, and if not, fear the flow of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to their original diet with which they are accustomed.
And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods which are heavy and difficult to digest, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, cabbage, turnips, beef stomachs, calves' feet, pork fat, and other similar things; and with this regimen a fracture becomes consolidated more gently and better.
And know that bones broken in the very old and the elderly cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
Certainly! Here is the translation of your text:
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the patient's food, food that contains heaviness, stickiness, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the hand bone; and similarly, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I will come with a description of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately from the others.
About the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is made an arched fracture, and one that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the patella and little bones and additions, whether they occur or not, as is done with a pen when preparing to write. It is also a fracture with a bruise and disruption at the end, and it is a small cracking fracture.
And in every way, it is a skill or torment for the patient's restoration according to what will come to mind later, distinctly in its places.
A sudden sign of bone fracture. And by this it is recognized as a bone fracture: it is the distortion of it, and the protrusion and appearance of it when touched, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
Therefore, when there is no apparent distortion in the place and no sound is produced by your touch, but rather when you shake the bone with your hand and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it is just a distortion or small fracture, so you should not move it with your hand and with total compression; rather, place on it the medicines of which there is memory at this moment that are suitable for the place; and then it should be tightly bound for subtle constriction.
And know that when the place is arched and not cut in two or anything else happens to it, as long as all parts of its shape are lifted up, then you should begin from your hour to straighten it, having that an abscess comes to it carefully.
And if the patient develops an abscess, leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; then cleanse it according to any method you can of lightness and skill.
And know that the restoration and cleansing of the patient is easier than that of the bone in which the injury occurred.
Then strengthen him according to how his recovery progresses.
But if the bone is broken, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limbs in their natural form while the parts of the broken bone are extended, so it is necessary for you to make them return to their places with skill and according to any method you can.
And take care according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient due to your operation, nor any injury; and it is necessary for you to apply one bone with its companion in their best forms.
And it is fitting that at that time you should touch the area with your hand, and if you see any different cause, correct it and cleanse it according to your ability.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And the quality of the constriction in a limb is what I describe to you, so that you know that broken limbs are varied in their smallness and largeness and in the form of those.
And for the small ones such as the arm and the finger and the thigh, similar to those, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
But for the large ones such as the hip or the thigh, it is necessary that on those there be a hard wrapping, because the hard wrapping tightly binds the large limb and strengthens it from all parts with an equal constriction, so that in it no lesion enters.
And then you begin, at the time of your evacuation from equilibrium, to place convenient ligaments on that, over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings as the limb requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligaments.
And then you come to that at the highest part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen more than you did not break your constriction with which you have strengthened the site of the fracture. And then you lengthen yourself with the wrapping of the site of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the site its great partition.
Based on the given text, here's a line-by-line translation of the new source sentence:
And then place between the folds of a stop or leather strip that has been soaked in the tortuous nature of the fracture, if there is any; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
And then place another bandage on it, and immediately soak these well-made steel strips, if there is no swelling or pustule in the area, and then place on it whatever removes that pustule and the swelling; leave it for several days; then strengthen the steel bands on it.
And let the steel bands be of the thickness of a cane reed, and be well-formed; or they may be of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let their width be according to this form and this figure:
However, the steel band that is placed on that fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the other bands, and the length of the band according to the size of the limb, whether large or small; and then strengthen over the bands with another bandage according to your first method; and then tie it up above with a decent tie as we have said about the binding, and that is, let your tie be according to the place of the fracture more, and the farther it is from the fracture, the less tight.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"And thin needles are not suitable, because with them you will not achieve what you want due to constriction, and it is not appropriate for there to be more than one finger's width between them.
"And if the patient is irritated by the tips of the needles near the constriction sites, then place a piece of wool or a soft cloth underneath until it no longer causes injury.
"Sometimes the break is with a wound, and there is a disruption in the cord; I will come back to that topic in the following chapter.
"And know that never is any broken limb strictly handled with needles on the first day; because if the limb is large, it is not fitting to place needles upon it except after approximately five or seven days, according to your certainty of avoiding an abscess.
"And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored [health], which were placed upon fractures, dislocations, and twists.
"Method of plaster as a brief summary for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and that is to take powder from the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour which you must collect from the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
And prepare him thus as he is, except that you bind his eyes with an egg white cloth, and do not make the bandage too thick or thin; then use this.
And another way to make a plaster that heals fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach (which is the root of wild balm), each one dracma x; myrrh and aloe, each one dracma v; and aloe, dracma xx. Let them all be finely ground and sifted, and mix them with either aloe water or egg white if the patient's complexion is dry; then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones gently, and it helps many men.
Another way to make a plaster for fractures and sprains: take migrach (wild celery root) and mugwort, each one dracma x; myrrh and aloe, each one dracma v; acacia, dracma vi; Armenian bole, dracma .xx.
Let them all be ground finely in a mortar with vinegar, and sifted, then made into a paste with water or egg white, and applied.
This text appears to describe a method for treating dislocated joints and bones, as well as the pain and swelling associated with these conditions. Let's translate it line by line:
In this ointment there is no virtue of restoration or pus removal, and it specifically expels pain.
Another method of ointment for restoration of fractures: take leaves of wild fig tree and wild poppy; crush everything together and make an ointment from them.
Method of brief ointment administration for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: take root of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and pea flour; divide everything equally and crush them all together, then apply with wine if the limb is not scraped.
But if it is scraped, then mix it with water or vinegar and use it.
Another method of ointment stronger in resolution than the previous one, when hard pus occurs for the restoration of the limb: take roots of mallow, linseed, and mullein, and melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all equally divided; crush everything together and mix with water from willow or soft water or wine, whichever is suitable for the quality of the limb and its color.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation:
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
It appears that the text deals with medical instructions or guidelines for treating specific ailments, particularly joint pain and related issues. Let's translate the given sentence line by line: And if there is a sudden or intense pain, swelling, or inflammation at the site, then you should immediately cut or lance it to relieve pressure and remove any dressing that was applied.
And take a clean cloth and a marine sponge soaked in warm water, and with it wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it overnight to ensure that the abscess does not burst, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is reduced.
And then you should repeat the application of a fine and small bandage and do not tighten it as strongly as before, and continue with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and inflammation, along with all the other symptoms, have completely subsided, and there is no longer a need for bandages or bindings, then you should continue in the same manner as you did at the beginning equally.
And if the member does not experience any of the causes mentioned earlier, then do not lance it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days depending on how the member appears after being lanced, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
And then adjust the stricture more than you did in the first stricture, and adjust according to the thickness of the patient's food, as his memory is restored.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and more withered than it should be, then know that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak it in warm water at all times until you remove it; and this should be done for three whole days; and lighten the stricture a little, and through this operation the nutrition will flow to the member, and it will heal slightly.
But what the foolish restorers of the fractured member do when they restore it later than at the beginning, as is proper, and it is restored according to its crookedness, this is an error according to their operation, and a great danger; and if this were done correctly, the ancients would have written about this in their books, and they would have worked with it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that you should not do it either.
Chapter Two: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
There are many types of fractures, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by the blow of an axe, and the blow breaks all the bone into the cavity, which is beneath the bone, just as it happens in a log, and because of this, this type is called ascial; or the axe cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh of it but does not cut through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the wound of these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture that is crushed or bruised; and the cause of it is striking with a hammer or falling on a stone, and likewise.
And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the skin near the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either great or small.
And it is a fracture that is fine within the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the strike of a stone, and similarly, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place, as happens to the earthenware pots when they are struck and are broken from their entrance into the divided parts within.
And this is mainly found in the bones of children, as well as in the heads of infants.
And for all these species of fractures that are splinters, they are painful like separated stars. And I will come with a reminder of all this to its place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures through detection on them and by examination with tests and the removal of decaying flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is recognized because it appears on the bone, it is washed and then examined with a probe, for the fracture looks black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms an evident sign of fear, such as vomiting from anger, fainting, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, discharge from the eyes and redness of them, similar to these symptoms in major constitutions, without doubt he will not be cured.
And if you see non-serious symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which means that if it has come to you in the beginning as a wound and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the removal of the bone before day fourteen according to every constitution.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should hasten to remove the bone before day seven, having that what is under the bone be corrupt from flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has reached the layer of fat covering the brain, and it is with small splinters and dust, then you must carefully incise the split and dusty part, as I will advise you to do.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the afflicted person, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as best as you can based on the shape of the wound, and do so gently upon the afflicted person.
And if you notice the detection of the bone, or an effusion of blood or pus, then you must prepare for it with whatever is necessary. This means filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oil, allowing the wound to rest until the pus subsides and the bleeding stops; then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
And this can be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with a narrow scalpel like this, and this is its shape: And then administer another scalpel, somewhat wider than the first; and this is its shape.
And then administer an even wider scalpel than the second one.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And use of them with ease in striking on the incisions, so that the head does not hit and hurt that person.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to bore a hole around it before you administer the incisions with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
And they are not named this way only because those do not reach the end of the bone where it is thickest, but also because the drill has a round extremity or edge on which there is a small sharp margin resembling a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone. ︎
And it is appropriate that you take of these drills a large number that each one is suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with the extremity being sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of those bones.
And this is the method of three species of drills: The method of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and revolve it with your said words until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another place, and place it so that everything passes through the quantity of the thickness of the ray or its surroundings.
Here's the translation of the given text:
And it is important that you ensure with all caution that the surgeon does not touch any cause of the scabies.
And therefore when you have drilled through the bone and if the scabies is continuous with it, and you have extracted that, it is necessary to scrape and shave it on its roughness of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to a knife, but nevertheless it must be thinner and more delicate than other knives.
And if any small and splintered parts of the bones remain, then take those easily with what you have of the instruments; and then cure the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of operation is gentle and far from fear, which they call Galenic and praise greatly; and this is his saying: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most intense and apparent, until when you have uncovered that part and placed underneath it the tip of this slow and gentle knife, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular part is round and does not cut any cause, and the pointed part extends from it two finger-widths in length, as you see; so that the lenticular part may be adapted to the scabies with its cutting face into the bone.
And then strike the small incision with a little hammer until all the bone is exposed with ease as it turns, and make sure that the fat layer does not suffer any accident that you fear in any way. If the doctor is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were asleep.
If there is any adhesion of the fat to the bone in some parts of the bone, incise that with the pointed end of the knife, and separate it from the bone easily, for it can be separated without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fat, and what is separated or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain on it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you may use them in the most convenient places and in the right way according to where your operation takes place on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer in your razor the one with which you initially scrape the bone, and then use the next one, which is finer, until you reach the point where you can use the finest and most subtle of all those razors.
"But in any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for their correction.
"And it is because not all those who have studied this art are skilled in it. "It has been written about and shown in the case of large fractures.
"And if the skin is cut when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press too hard; and then administer a bandage with lard, and do not tighten it more than is necessary for the wound alone.
"And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess is cauterized; and then unbind it and administer medicines which have a superfluous dryness, such as linseed oil and powdered iris root, and poppy seeds and similar things.
And it is that you make a powder from these medications, which should be sprinkled on the wound as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine of such a nature that it cleanses and does not cause pain.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and do not allow it to have any scab or other; nor let it accumulate pus in it; for when it is confined beneath the skin, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes in the patient a malignant disease.
And it happens in the vault of the skull, when the bone is exposed and especially if its care has been neglected, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider whether these accidents happen to the patient, for you should know that it is very harmful without any doubt.
And if there is no blackness except from the medication that has been applied on it, and it is due to that medication that this blackness occurs, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and with these moisten a cloth, and then place it on the vault; and then care for it with the necessary curative herbs until it is healed.
Chapter III
Of the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
Know that the nose is not broken but rather divided into two parts at once, the upper and lower, or one of these parts may be displaced, because there are two bones in it, and the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot be broken; only contusion, distortion, and curvature occur.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nose and close the fracture from inside with your index finger, and with your thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And you should do this gently, being careful not to cause pain to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it must be equalized with the tip of a reed that has a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should do the same thing.
And take care to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you should wait for the abscess to heal after seven or ten days.
And then insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one place, or put two pieces, if the fracture is in two places, and let it be thick enough to fill the hole in the nose.
And so say some of the ancient restorers that the pieces should be wrapped in fat and changed daily, but I have not seen this. It is necessary for the piece to be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered bone; and then leave the piece inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it is inserted into the nose instead of a piece, namely a wooden peg that is wrapped in linen cloth; and let this be done when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prevented from breathing.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use pieces.
And if another time a carbuncle occurs, place a plaster on the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if a carbuncle does not occur, then it is necessary to plaster the outside with sumac flour and powdered anise mixed with egg white; and then place a linen bandage over it, and do not touch the nose with anything else.
Here's the translation of your given sentence:
And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure that with clips and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
The restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not with a wound, consider if the fracture is only on the outside and not broken in two, and it curves at the inner parts, then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and with it, press the swelling of the fracture inside to the outside parts, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; with that, reduce it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of the two parts in line with each other until their approximation becomes possible.
And if there is a loosening of the teeth to the point of disruption, then strengthen them with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and place wax over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and place a well-made large starched cloth over that, or a sole of leather equal in length to the jaw; and secure it above according to how you are skilled in bandaging and apply it conveniently, so that it is not disrupted.
And order the patient to rest and remain calm, and give them light and simple food.
And if you think that the shape has already been altered in any way, then remove it on the third day; and afterward rectify what has been altered and apply a plaster made of powdered bran, egg white, or samolina flour, after removing the cerot from him, and place clean wool over the plaster.
And when this plaster is attached and adjusted to him, and the bone's position has not been altered, leave it in place until he is healed and the fracture strengthens; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what has been said many times for his treatment until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone that has become separated or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters using what is appropriate for removing such fragments from instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it using a fleam according to your need.
When you have removed those splinters, and nothing remains of them, then sew up the orifice of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place one of the suitable plasters on it that will help heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 5
On restoring the collarbone when it is broken.
Often the collarbone is broken from its front side due to a muscle and this break can occur in one of three ways.
Because it is either broken, separated, or broken into two parts without splinters; and the restoration of it is easy; or it happens that there are splinters in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the break is with a wound.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards that side.
And then gently close the fracture with your fingers until it is formed correctly according to its shape and there are no prominent parts or concavities.
And if you need more extension, then place a pad of cloth or wool under the patient's heel, and its size should be according to your necessity; then extend and raise the ankle and press the pad with your hand until it aligns the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the ankle to its original position because it has turned inward, then the patient should be placed supine on their back, and place a cushion of medium size over their calf muscle.
And the assistant should press the patient's calf muscle back into its original position until the bone of the ankle is raised and comes out of the inverted position; then you straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel bone splinters from the ankle and they are prominent, then it is necessary to make an incision over that area and remove those splinters easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the ankle the instrument that serves as a splint; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is its shape:
And it is similar to a cup, whose this is the hollow part; and its size should be according to what you need from it, depending on the bigness of the bone or the smallness of it.
"But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; so that there are two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
"And if the wound that you have cut when you have extracted the arrow from the bone is wide, and you are certain of pus, then you should bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches.
"And if the wound is small, or you fear certain pus, then fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the extent of the wound's opening.
"And if certain pus occurs, then infuse a cloth with vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that.
And thus, make sure that the bandage is not too tight over the broken bone; and for this reason, it is necessary for you to see the patient every day. When the bandage becomes softened or you notice that the bone has moved, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the patient's head on their chest, and put a small pillow under their neck at night; so that with this, the helper's aid to the side of the patient is elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula (wishbone) is raised by the muscle's elevation; or tie the patient's arm to their chest.
And do not untie the bandage unless swelling or pus appears in the place, within twelve days.
And then renew the poultice if you see that the face of it is towards this, and adjust it in the narrow part and restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the furcula is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter .VI
Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Here's my translation of the sentence:
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that sentence into English:
This is quite challenging, but I'll give it my best shot! The text appears to be discussing some sort of medical treatment involving the application of various materials or items on a specific location (likely the affected area). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's the translation of your new sentence:
"Then strengthen it above with a bandage tightly wound and securely fastened, so that it is not displaced from its place.
This line seems to be discussing the treatment or observation of bandages on a patient:
"And you apply pressure on the patient's wound.
"And the spatula is restored in 10 days or in 25.
"And therefore when this period is complete, then you remove the bandage, and know for certain that it is one of the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
"And if you proceed from the bone itself, press and place a string under it, then cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said regarding the break of the clavicle with caution if this occurs here.
"Chapter VII.
"On the healing of a foot fracture.
"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals late; but the ends of it move too much and are shattered and crushed.
"And the consequences of this are that when it breaks in the middle, it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and the cavity in the broken bone is evident to touch.
"And its healing is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; then press the muscles of the patient, and adjust the ribs of the patient with the hands of two assistants, and be skillful in the operation of it and in the position according to every manner that is possible and that is suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as needed.
Here's my attempt at translating the text line by line:
And if the necessity provokes the removal of that corruption or pustule, or pain, or abscess that occurs in that place, then you cut and undo that (area) and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred with the manner of healing it; and then return the plaster, if needed to the face; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Chapter 8.
Of the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large areas near the spine; and at their ends, toward the front, such an accident does not happen to them except because they are made of cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling, but the investigation of it should be done with the hands.
And the restoration should be done by placing the hand on the fracture according to what is possible until it is well positioned, and then bandage and strengthen the broken bone with iron, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal parts, then a very strong pain and puncture occurs in the patient, just like a puncture that happens to someone with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the peritoneum; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur; and this is difficult to cure. ︎
And already the Ancients were ingenious in this with many ingenious methods.
And among them is this: it is necessary to place food in front of the patient that produces inflation and gas, so that the stomach is inflated and expanded, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Here's the translation of your given sentence:
And some of them say that it should be placed on the abdomen and then sucked strongly; this seems reasonable, but there is fear that the abdominal suction will draw the excess to the area due to weakness.
And some of them say: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool already soaked in hot oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled; let the bandage be equal to when you wrap around according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a poultice of food and medicine.
And if the intense pain that the patient experiences is unbearable and the bone punctures through the skin with its tip, then fear for the patient; in this case, it is necessary to cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument that maintains traction. The use of which was mentioned earlier, and easily split the bone, and remove it.
Then we should approximate the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then you should heat and soak pillows in oil and place them on the area; and treat the patient with water that is suitable for the internal abscess.
And he should be laid on his back on the bed in which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, but it tends to heal on its own, as do the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider: if you see their limbs softened and numb, without the ability to move or extend them, and when you press those limbs with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no sensation of pain, then know that it is not healing, and such conditions are fatal.
And if they move and feel constriction with their fingers and needle pricks, then know that the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with care.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck in a similar condition and want to know if they will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are softened, the same thing has happened to them as with the limbs, and furthermore when he lies on his back, there is a lack of breath and defecation without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then know that it is fatal, and in such cases do not bother with his care.
"But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
"And the treatment for this is that you pierce the abscess carefully with a heated needle or a lancet; place over it some warm oil, alone, or mixed with some honey. Place this over the affected area several times a day until the abscess is drained.
"Then place a comforting and soothing plaster on it, and secure it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the painful side until healed.
"And if there is an exudation of pus or any other cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to dry the area and remove that bone; and then bring together the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with some ointment until healed.
"But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the shaft, then you should insert the index finger of your left hand into the rectum, and straighten the broken bone with your other hand as best as you can; then place over it a plaster and bandage, if necessary, and secure it.
And if you feel that there are broken bones in the patient, then perform a surgical procedure on them, remove those bones, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it is healed.
Capítulo 10.
Sobre la restauración de la hinchazón.
Los huesos de las caderas suelen estar rotos, y si están rotos, la fractura de ellos no es más que una división en los extremos de esos huesos, y son incisivos en longitud y se inclinan hacia el interior; y ocurre dolor al paciente en ese lugar y punción, y la pierna está adormecida cuando hay fractura.
La restauración de él es que extiendas tu mano sobre el área hasta que esté en contacto con la fractura, que se parece a una figura de él.
Y si la fractura está solo en el extremo de él, entonces alinea esa parte según lo que te parezca más apropiado, con una alineación hasta que se asemeje a su forma natural.
Pero si la fractura está en el hueso largo que ya se ha desviado hacia adentro, entonces haz que el paciente se acueste boca arriba para que esté listo para que tú realices la restauración de esa fractura. And thus, when you have thoroughly cleaned that area, place an emplaster on it. Then, place a piece of wood or bone on top of the emplaster, and bind it tightly so that you do not need to worry about puncturing the fracture or dislodging the splint.
And clean the cavity with water until it absorbs the mixture and applies the bandage evenly. Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
However, if you detect an abscess, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the abscess has subsided. Place water on it to cool it down as previously mentioned; then return to restoring it and bind it in the appropriate manner.
And if this occurs with the shinbone or if they are fractured, then you should splint them.
Chapter XI
On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is that which is between the arm and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is done in one of two ways. One way is for you to take a flat piece of wood, half an inch thick, in this shape:
It seems like this text is about medical procedures or prescriptions from the medieval period. Let's break down the sentence you provided and translate it line by line into English:
And follow the patient onto a bench; then immediately throw his broken arm over the post until it reaches the point where the curve of the post is at its midpoint.
And immediately suspend the patient by any means possible, or if the attendant extends him to the sides; then the doctor should place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture is restored to its proper position.
Another method is to have the patient lie supine on his back, and suspend his hand from his neck with a ligament; then command two attendants: one should hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other should hold the lower part of it; and each should extend it towards their respective sides.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with a ligament and over it with another ligament, and each of the two attendants should extend towards their respective sides.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligament be placed on the little finger, and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary that the ligament be placed on that spot and on that elbow.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Sure, let's translate that sentence line by line:
And place a cloth and strengthen on the assistants' arms to support the patient's arm, unless there is any reason for a broken bone.
Then use splints.
And place on the fracture that splint which is the broadest and strongest of all the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on both ends.
And then strengthen the splints with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let your bandage on the site of the fracture be tighter. And the longer the fracture, the narrower should be the bandage.
And thus, if you see that the position of the splints and the bandage are as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess is forming, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the swelling in all parts for three days to prevent a bruise or swelling from occurring; or it is prohibited that food should reach the limb due to the superfluous tightness of the bandage, and so correct everything as we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will go wrong with this condition, then do not release the bandage until at least three days have passed.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place a full linen pillow over the helper's chest, and always make sure throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced or dissolved, or that the bandage becomes softened; therefore, rectify this with all your skill.
And feed the patient according to the order we mentioned before, so that at first the food is thin until it starts to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food thicker for them.
Because it is customary for the helper and the leg to be strengthened within 40 days; therefore, they should be released and a bath should be administered, and they should be treated with ointments that can correct this condition.
And if the break is very recent, then you should not remove from it the bandage and splints before one day or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if only the large fireplace is broken and the small one is also broken at the same time, it means that both are cracked.
And when the small fireplace is broken on top, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the fireplace of him breaks below the fracture, it is serious, and his healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fireplace on top, then it is appropriate for the doctor to apply a small extension with ease until it is healed.
But if the large fireplace is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply a more vigorous extension.
And if both fireplaces are broken at the same time, then it is necessary for you to apply a stronger extension.
And it is necessary for you to make the shape of your hand for its restoration, and extend the extension over a cushion, with the palm of your hand on the separated parts above, more than all the other fingers, and let the auricular finger be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
And place a cushion in front of him on the bed or bench, so that the patient does not slip downwards.
And then have one minister extend his arm from below with his hand or a bandage, and another minister do the same above.
Then the doctor should envelop the bone until it is reduced to its best form possible.
And if there are fragments in the fracture, then use your skill to reduce all of them to their place.
And if there appears to be a fragment separated that touches the spine and it is not within your hope for its restoration, then make an incision over it and remove it according to the manner we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have made a special chapter about that, so take care of it in the way described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a poultice made of rose oil and white beeswax, which should be midway between thinness and thickness, and place a strong cloth over it with gentle pressure until the abscess has subsided; then remove the poultice and apply a plaster prepared from powdered bran with egg whites, and then place irons [on top]; and let the iron placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars on the arm indicates in major conditions, whether it is a break in one finger or two fingers at once.
And then press strongly and firmly on the location of the break, and when the pressure extends to the parts above or below the break, moisten the stricture a little more according to how it was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough; the thread with which it is tightened should be of medium thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.
And examine the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any swelling occurs which requires correction, as soon as the swelling appears on the limb, then it is necessary to immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And let the member rest unconstrained until it heals, and then reapply the bandage.
And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has healed and appears such, then straighten everything with your skill.
And consider whether the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to an excess of stricture, because then it is necessary to soften that area a little and leave it alone for some days until the nourishment reaches that part, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes mentioned above, then it is not necessary to release him for about 20 days or around that time period.
And the patient's hand should be suspended due to its power of agitated movements, and make them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or it is slightly restored in 28 days, and all this depends on the complexity of the condition and the strength of the constitution.
Chapter XIII
On the restoration of a broken finger of the hand.
Know that in the fingers of the hand and in the toes of the feet, fractures rarely occur, and they are not experienced except for bruises.
And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruise, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back and in front of them place hundredweights according to balance, and then place the hand of the patient on that which is extended.
Sure, let's break down and translate this line by line:
Here's the translation of the given text:
If the grip is on the inner parts, you should vent the palm of the hand, and then make it look like a fabric sphere, and tell the patient to grasp it with their gripped hand; immediately wrap it tightly with long cloth.
And the stone should be placed on the back of the hand with cloth in which it is wrapped, so that the stone is applied to the palm; grasp this as needed.
But if the break is on the outer parts, then place a stone on top and another stone from the broken part underneath in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and immediately bind the fracture, tying it with cloth between the stones as mentioned.
And if there is a break in any of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the fingertip, wrap it as needed and immediately bind it with the palm, and if you wish, place a small stone on top to raise the fracture and prevent displacement.
But if the break is in other fingers, such as the middle finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then wrap and bind it together with its neighboring finger, or bind all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small stone on top, as we have said for the fingertip.
And consider, in your treatment and especially then, the condition of abscess caution and opposition — with your operation — with what is necessary when some cause occurs from those, according to the repeated account of it.
Chapter XIV
Of the treatment for a fracture in the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the hip is often broken and is felt as it separates into parts, both in front and above.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient should be placed on their stomach and face down.
And then the assistant should extend all of the bandage to its full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the hip joint, then let the bandage be close to the groin in the thigh area, so that the extension reaches there, and the other bandage under the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be made close to the knee, and the extension should be towards the lower parts. ‌
And then the doctor should use both hands to guide the bone back into its correct position according to nature's likeness and rejoin it with a good union; in this case, one must apply plaster and bandage, otherwise, an abscess may occur on the limb. But if an abscess does occur in him, then you should leave it for some days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage for him should be made in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing excess material; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the base of the knee.
Then insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg close to the wound on both sides, ensuring that the ends of the needle protrude from the higher part of the two sides; then turn what is left of the bandage around the leg and the thigh.
Then place on the thigh in the location of that fracture thorns, and from those place one thorn on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the empty spaces between the thigh and the hip with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be clotted.
And then begin with a strong binding in the middle of the fracture site with three or four wraps, and the more you move away from the fracture site, the looser and moister your binding should be.
And then extend the two ends of the cord to the broken parts until they reach the ankle bone of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding is not dislodged from its place.
And then loosen the binding so that it does not cause necrosis or aposteme, nor swelling and similar conditions; and if any of these conditions occur, then be careful with separation from him, and correct what happens as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
But if the bone is protruding from the flesh, then you must flatten it as much as possible; and if not, place a poultice on it and leave it there, and treat it with whatever was mentioned earlier until it heals.
"And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strong enough that it must be set back into place, as we have said in the case of the shoulder and arm.
"However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, paralysis does not occur; and if it is restored alone, or if the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the patient always walks with a limp.
"And know that the hip is strong in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the complexity of the case and other conditions.
"Chapter XV
"On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
"Know that the fracture of the knee joint often occurs late, but it is common for swelling to occur immediately.
"But if the fracture occurs, it is not a complete break but rather a crack or split in its parts, with or without bleeding, and all of this depends on the sensation.
"And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be made equal with the aforementioned until it is brought together and joined as much as possible by straightening, easiness, and skill.
And then place a poultice and apply it over that round stela, if you need to use it; and bind it tightly with a bandage suitable for this purpose.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying heat and similar remedies, to prevent any accidents from occurring with whatever is suitable for him until he is healed.
Chapter XVI
On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And it happens to each of the types of fracture that happens to both bones of the arm, and for this reason its restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, with one operation being performed on both.
And if two bones are broken at the same time, the thigh is completely shattered.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh is shattered in the front part.
And if the larger bone is broken, it is behind that one, and this is one of those cases that you are not familiar with.
And then administer extension, traction, and ligament tension according to the same principle.
However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture is jagged with many splinters, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your skill.
And when there is a need to operate on the arm due to a thigh fracture, and you have aligned the bones and completed the entire operation, then take wooden wedges, which are placed under the supports that are usually placed alone, and they are made in the same way as palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not very thick, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and the end is deeper.
Then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the upper part of the thigh on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be as deep as possible towards the foot.
Then bind the two bones in three places at each end and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and it stays in a good position.
And now a bandage of wood has been administered according to the length of the thigh; it has been placed on him, the thigh, so that he remains immobile.
And it is especially important that you do this in cases of a fracture, and when dealing with that specific wound.
And every day consider the thigh and study it closely for any changes, and guard against abscesses and swelling or other similar causes; and if any such cause occurs, then apply appropriate treatment until he is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and it only happens to them when they are in poor condition.
And if the bones of the foot seem to be fractured and these bones are raised up above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if walking.
And then place the other foot on top of the raised bone, and press down, and splint it until it returns to its original position.
And then place a poultice and cotton on top, and place beneath the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen it by pulling the foot downward with a descent structure, since you have wrapped it in cloth and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed with the patient, then you should remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are swollen, or they may be pinched or dislocated, and the operation in these cases is as follows:
But if any bones are pinched, then restore those and swell them as I have shown you in the restoration of the hand's fingers. And then place on the pinched finger a splint according to its length, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; and then place the foot on the previously mentioned board, and strengthen it with a suitable structure.
But if what is pinched among the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the flat surfaces of the board under the foot so that it holds it securely.
And it is fitting for you to remember not to overlook all the causes that have been mentioned to you in other accidents that we have discussed; and be prepared for any accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the woman's knee, the man's shinbone, and the penis.
When the woman's knee is broken, then make her sit in a chair with her back bent slightly forward and hold her behind the back.
And then the matron should fill the knee with cotton, and it should be done in the same manner as shown; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, because all this is forgotten until the fracture is before the part of the knee as shown and the broken bone returns.
And then place cushions on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently remove the cotton, and let her urinate, and replace it and return it as you did at the beginning, and then return to her first position.
And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will be healed.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and attach a reed to its opening; then insert the entire bladder into his wound, and afterwards blow into the reed with all your might until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
And let it be filled with cotton and kept there for several days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and consolidation that which we have recommended for the hip bone.
And that which is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and rarely happens, especially to those who have some learning and use and understand this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the major dispositions by the right way in its restoration and fixation, and therefore understand it well.
But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take an eagle's eggshell, and put the penis into it; then place over it a cloth wrap, and let it be wrapped up, and afterwards let it be laid aside for three days or around that number, and let it heal.
**Capítulo XIX.**
**Sobre la curación de fracturas óseas cuando hay herida.**
**Es conveniente para aquel al que le ocurre una fractura con herida, y especialmente si el hueso es grande, como el fémur o la tibia, u otro similar, que te cuidarás de hacerle flebotomía tan pronto como las condiciones de flebotomía lo permitan, tal como hemos dicho anteriormente.**
**Y si la herida sangra, entonces debes asegurarte de detener el sangrado, por lo que espolvorearás sobre ella pólvora seca, a menos que haya otra causa.**
**Y luego comienza a curar la fractura el mismo día y no postergues esto, a menos que ocurra un absceso.**
**Pero si ocurre un absceso, entonces debes dejar la restauración de la fractura hasta el noveno día, cuando el absceso haya disminuido, y no te acerques a él en los tres primeros días ni en los siguientes cuatro, porque causarás accidentes adversos.**
**Pero si el hueso está fracturado de manera prominente sobre la parte descubierta del cráneo, entonces debes esforzarte en reducirlo y alinearlo con tus manos con facilidad y con poca extensión.**
Based on the provided pattern, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And he is returned (to consciousness), and there is little pain in him so that he is not bent double, then place the compress on him at the time of the operation.
And it is an acute extremity that has margins in its extremities; and it is above him, tending to swell, and from the middle of him enters into parts.
And this is his form:
And it is called in Greek "labrys willing to cut," which means small hammer or axe.
Therefore, the pointed extremity should be placed on top of the eminent bone's extremity.
And you impale it in one stroke until the bone returns and is made equal.
And so you strive to make the extremities of the fracture equal between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not accept the instrument well, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then insert it with something that is suitable for it from among the inserters which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then grind that which remains in the bones into fine particles.
And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient then finds very intense toothache-like pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and in that case, do what you can to help the patient greatly.
When you have finished the restoration that you are doing on the bone, then submerge a cloth in strong black wine (vinegar), especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or any other oily substance on the wound, so that putrefaction and corruption will not occur in it.
And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can clean it with tweezers and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolhardy physicians have done this and caused death or severe illness in their patients. This is unhealthy. And if the scar is light and soft, different from the scars of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear that bad accidents might occur as we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then it is not appropriate to place bandages on that area. Instead, make an envelope of hard cloths in the place of bandages and strengthen it with those.
And when after one day or two the wound has already started to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed on it with forceps, and then administer warm compresses, ointments which are commonly used for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ointments.
And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and sealed, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it towards the lower parts easily.
If many days have passed and the wound is not healed or separated from the pus, then you should know that here are the actions of small worms; therefore, it is necessary to probe the wound with a probe. And from those actions, those that are separated are to be removed and extracted; but those that cannot be separated and affect the limb and cause pain, you must endeavor to cut them out as much as possible.
And if the wound is infected with pus or matter, and it becomes suppurative or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply to each of these [infections] that which is appropriate for them from the treatment of which the preceding narrative is in its chapter.
And concerning which you should direct your attention and present your judgment: when the bone is crushed, it protrudes from the member like the bones of the pelvis and the hips, and resembles those of the large members, and you should not attempt to remove it, nor its extraction, because often death results from this; leaving it in place so that it may ossify, for if it is strong, it will fall off by itself within about 20 or 30 days; then heal the wound if you see fit, and if not leave it alone.
Chapter XX
Of the treatment of nodules that occur as a result of some fracture.
This nodule often occurs in the wake of a fracture's healing process, particularly near the joints, and it takes on the shape of the member, and very strongly inhibits the member from its natural operation.
Here's the translation of your provided text:
And allow no constriction to remain there for more than a few days; then remove it and replace it with another, until the swelling has subsided; or place a lead sheet on that area firmly, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammations in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into stone and it is tight and necessitates being removed urgently, then cut through it in its most superior part, and cut away the excess and prominent parts, or rasp it with sharp rasps until it subsides; and treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture, when it is restored and then the limb remains subtle and frail, not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains subtle and frail, this happens only for several reasons: one of which is an excess of dissolution of the ligament and its binding, not done as it should be; or due to an excessive tightness of the ligaments so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb; or due to an excess of superfluous bandaging; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until their blood is replenished within them; administer a bath; and interject joy and happiness upon them.
Then place a poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws out the unhealthy nourishment, or continue to bathe it with tepid water until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
Concerning the treatment of broken bones when they are set crookedly, and you forbid the operation of correcting them as necessary.
When it happens to the member that has been set crookedly and with a protrusion of the broken bone and swelling, and this is due to the faulty shape of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who thinks that the member has just been broken.
But there have been many foolish physicians and surgeons who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is death.
But if the limping and swelling are recent, then they should be bathed with tepid water in which are soaked softening herbs such as leaves of mallow and roots of althaea, and melilot, and similar to those; and a plaster should be made with a softening plaster such as diacutylon well-made; or take the root of althaea and mix it with egg white or oil of camomile, and make a plaster with that; or take fat figs and mash them with pigeon dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are named amers, consolidation.
And sometimes it is resolved with gentle and persistent friction, using the hands moistened slightly, and the member should be moved in all directions at all times.
But if the condition has advanced and is severe, turning into a stone, and surgical intervention is necessary, then it should be cut above the ankle, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved. The excess material from the knot of that same bone should be removed with fine incisions, and facilitation should be administered to that person with care and diligence.
Chapter .23.
On speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of its joints from its proper place, impeding movement and distorting the figure of the member, causing great pain and injury in the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced immediately and not delayed, because if it is delayed, the site becomes swollen and difficult to reduce due to fluid accumulation.
And for this reason, it should not be moved or stretched during the time of swelling, because multiple views cause spasm and severe pain.
When this happens, it is necessary for you to turn to the patient's bloodletting, and then let the pus drain; and then wrap the affected area with hot water and oil, and then reduce it gently.
And let every member be treated with water that comes to mind in its place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was mentioned earlier about fracture, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Chapter 24
About treating the dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both jaws are dislocated simultaneously and not much time has passed; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a small displacement and are somewhat softened, or they are completely dislocated to the point where they are softened at the joint, until saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its own words.
But when the dislocation is minor, it often returns to normal on its own with little effort.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And it is that the assistant hold the head of the patient, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the socket of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and let the other fingers rest outside with which he balances himself; and command the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move freely in any direction; and the doctor balances the jaw and moves it back until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then apply a warm compress with hot water and oil until a light reduction of both is achieved, and do not delay the complete reduction of both, as we have said.
And once they have returned and are balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed but not softened, then place a bandage of cloth with wax on top, made from wax and rose oil; and then bind it gently with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything; if they are hungry, give them soft food until the pain has subsided and the jaws have healed, then let them eat whatever they want.
And this should be administered with ease, and without difficulty through the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and speaking until the jaw is healed.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they are not returned to their places, then it usually happens that fevers and constant sweating occur, and the patient's stomach becomes very swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and it usually happens that he who experiences this dies within ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the clavicle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside due to its continuous connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outer side, and this can be felt by touch.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then you should press the area firmly with your palm, because it will return.
Then place a plaster and bandages on it and strengthen that area.
"However, if the end of the shoulder is continuous with it, then it has not been dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and splinted according to what we have said and according to your skill.
"Then place a plaster, powder, and bandage on it, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until they are healed.
"And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
"Chapter 26.
"On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
"Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the small bone to the large bone.
"And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is rare; and it is not dislocated to the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
"And most commonly it is dislocated and comes out at the parts below the small bone, and this occurs more easily in those with little flesh, but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And if a strong blow or fall happens to some men, and the muscle of the person becomes swollen with acute inflammation, it is suspected that this is a dislocation due to that.
Then you should approach him so that you are above him, and then proceed with his care.
And the dislocation of it is known when in the joints you should tickle; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find in the head of the muscle concavity and after tickling you should touch the head of the muscle as if it were an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their ear, nor can they move it more.
If it is dislocated, you should do so with the feet or hands, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation can be reduced lightly when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand to the joint above; and then places their fingers under the ticklish part of it, and raises the joint with strength back into its place, and the attendant lifts the patient's hand, and extends it upward; and then places it beneath because it returns lightly.
Based on the context and patterns from the previous text, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the context and similarity to other medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if you wish to proceed in this manner: it is that you have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on the side of his legs. He should insert his muscle beneath the patient's shoulder blade and lift the shoulder blade up until the patient is suspended in the air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand from their side below their belly. But if the patient is light, it is necessary that another person be suspended with them, in order to make them heavier, because the dislocation returns quickly otherwise.
And it can also be reduced in another manner: that is, a long pole should be planted into the ground with a rounded head like a mortar pestle, not too thick or thin. Then drapes should be placed beneath the patient, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole. Then their hand should be extended toward one side, while their body is firmly pulled in the opposite direction, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this remedy: that you take a pole whose length is two arms long and width four fingers, and its thickness should be thinner at the top according to this shape:
And immediately over the head, a linen cloth should be placed so that the patient is not injured by the beam.
And immediately place yourself under the patient's shoulders, and extend your arm or hand over the beam between the supports, and bind the beam to the supports and arms and the tip of the hand.
Immediately place your arm on a step of the ladder according to its length, and extend your hand between the parts, and let the other body part hang from the other side, because the joint will be entered soon.
And when the insertion of it is completed according to whatever manner that is possible for you, then it is necessary that you place under the shoulder a pad made of wool of equal thickness; and immediately apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrobalan with honey and egg white over all the muscles, so that it is wrapped around, and immediately bind under the shoulder with a decent bandage; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
It is necessary that the patient's food should be reduced to little, until the member has been comforted, for it is lighter for his healing.
And if food is given after about seven days and movement is exercised; and then if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
However, if the joint is dislocated due to excessive moisture that happens to him or for another reason, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three holes, as was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the tightness are reduced some times over him, and it is not fixed but rather he cannot raise that arm to its place above, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place.
In the case of a dislocation that is made in the feet and the breasts or parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and stretching with the hands until it returns to its place.
And another bandage should be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it happens near the time of healing that there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and his nature returns to its original state.
The phrase "Capitol .xxvii." translates to "Chapter XXVII." This is indicating that what follows is part of Chapter 27 in this medieval medical treatise.
"De curacio de dislocacio del coyde." translates to "About the treatment of shoulder dislocation." This sentence indicates that the text will discuss methods for treating a dislocated shoulder.
"Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.
And it is necessary that you make cuts and immediately reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, because if an abscess forms, reducing it becomes difficult, and recovery is not certain; this is especially true when the dislocation occurs in the back, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations, with more severe pain, and many times people die from that.
And its restoration, when possible, is done by extending the patient's hand with two hands, and spreading their arm, and placing the physician's hands on the elbow and beneath it, and the doctor pushes the joint back into place with the thumb and index finger of both hands or with the edge of the palm until it returns to its original position.
However, if the dislocation is in the front, then return it by bending the hand with its own hand until you strike the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply violent extension and much force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and both should hold it firmly in place so that it is not moved during the extension.
And then you should gently roll the arms in all directions, as they are wrapped in long-folded cloth or bandages around the patient's hands.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this helps to facilitate the lubrication of the joint; then he should strongly press on the joint until it returns.
Then, after the reduction of the dislocation, it should be placed on a poultice that contains astringent and absorbent properties with egg white, and it should be tied firmly in place. The arm should be hung from the neck, and it should be left like this for several days.
And then it should be unbound; and if the joint has returned to its proper place, then you should remove the bandage from the patient and leave it that way.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you should reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it like this for several days until it is strengthened; then unbind it.
But if there is severe pain around the time of the joint reduction and the patient's condition is unstable, then administer moist heat in the form of baths and subtle friction, along with compression until it is relieved; or place a weight on the affected joint, such as a heavy cushion; and then bind it tightly, leaving it in this position day and night. Here's my attempt at translating the sentence: In the process of bathing, enter until it is complete.
And if you wish, place over that moist and scraped cow skin flap and strain on it; do this several times, because that (the flap) is moist and returns to its original state.
Chapter 28
On the treatment of dislocation, particularly of the joint between the arm and hand.
Dislocation of the hand can sometimes occur, and its reduction is easy, unlike that of other joints. However, it is important to quickly reduce it at the moment it becomes dislocated, before an abscess forms or a dangerous abscess develops.
The reduction of the dislocation is as follows: you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and instruct them to extend their hand. The physician then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes until it returns to its original position.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already separated from the back of the hand. If so, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation is posterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls over the prominence of the joint. iety
And therefore if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a poultice to encourage the abscess to drain and leave it; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you will not be able to endure or resist the return of pus in the following days.
But nevertheless the joint remains according to its twisted nature; and do not attribute any cause to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and there is no remedy for it except to strengthen it with a cautery near the affected area and you will give it some cause.
Therefore, when the illness has returned, then place on it the poultice that we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
But if the patient's movement is obstructed and some gravity occurs in them, then relieve that with hot water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the aforementioned (limbs).
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les dits a tota partida.
And when one of these bones is dislocated at the back of the palm or on its underside, then hold the bone and press with your fingers until it returns to its original position.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that which is dislocated from the affected part for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its proper place on that same day.
And at night, bandage it according to the instructions, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and bandage it again at night; and do this for a few days until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated on the back of the hand; bandage it to that part and perform the first operation with your fingers until it is healed.
And similarly, do this when it is dislocated in other places.
Chapter .30
Of the treatment of spinal dislocation.
When a complete dislocation of one of the spine's vertebrae occurs, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure for it, because death will come to the patient.
This sentence describes symptoms of an involuntary bodily function and paralysis or loss of movement in certain limbs. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Therefore, when it is moved to the posterior parts, it is called jaundice.
But the cure for it is that one should consider whether the jaundice occurs in infancy, because then there is neither a cure nor complete healing for it.
However, in cases where it occurs due to injury or bruising or something similar to those, the ancients have described the methods of cure in lengthy discourses, from which the most profit is derived; but I have abbreviated that from which little is omitted due to its excessive length, for the sake of my own conciseness in this presentation. With this, I have expounded and compiled it from various sources with which I will show and explain it.
And none of these are cured except those that occur specifically in the back, as I will relate.  :)
And it is that the patient should be laid flat on his back close to a wall, and below him there should be a moist cloth so that his feet are not raised.
And then a straight stick should be placed, stuck in the ground at the extreme end of the foot near their head, and another stick underneath their feet at the other end of the foot.
And one assistant should hold the stick, ensuring it is not fixed in a hole; and another assistant should hold the other one similarly.
And then wrap the bandages around the patient's head and tie them firmly at the end of the bandage near their head, and attach it to the stick; and then stretch another bandage over their shoulders behind them and across their thighs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick underneath their feet.
And then each assistant should extend the bandages to the end of the stick, and ensure that neither the two sticks nor the bandages are moved from their positions in which they were placed; however, they should not be fixed as we have said.
And the physician should place their palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or they can place something flat over it, and then they should adjust their feet on the flat surface until it returns.
But if it does not return with this method, then take a board whose length or width is at least three arms' length, and make an opening in the wall near where the patient is lying, so that the end of the board can fit through it. Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And place a round stick on which there is a pulley, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole into which the stick is inserted, the length of which is one hand span more than that which is turned; and in the other two sticks there are similar ones.
And then tighten the bindings that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole which should be over their head, and the bindings that you have tied around their thighs on the pulley which should be over their feet.
And then each pulley should be attended by a servant who turns the pulley with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
And after the spine has been straightened and the area smoothed out, then it is necessary to place a dry paste with egg white on it, and then wool; and then place on the paste a board whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length covers the area of the swelling, and let it be placed on the part of the spine.
And then bind it with the binding we mentioned earlier, and let the patient eat light food until they are healed.
And if there remains any swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and cleanse with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already in that place a lead sheet has been administered.
And sometimes swelling occurs in the last of the vertebrae of the back, and it is believed that this is due to dislocation; and it is that bone which has already swollen, so it is not advisable to make an incision on it with this medicine, for it will cause you to die.
Chapter 31
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint are considered only as dislocations, and not what happens to other small joints with slight displacement and concavity.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, either to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And it is most commonly dislocated towards the inner parts, and rarely towards the front or the back.
Here is the translation of your sentence:
And the sign of someone who has experienced dislocation is that the affected parts are moved outward, indicating that this condition opposes other conditions.
And the sign of dislocation occurring in front is that the affected thigh extends according to its length, but without bending it unless there is pain in the joint; and if one tries to walk and cannot, then it is dislocation in front; and his urine is retained and he has a swelling, and you should make him walk on his heels.
And the sign of dislocation occurring in back is that the joint does not extend, nor can it bend as much as the other side; and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the knee is swollen, and you should bring the head of the femur to its place.
However, the reduction of these types of dislocation depends on whether you consider it to be old and chronic, in which case it is better not to attempt reduction immediately but rather to let it remain in its current position; in such cases, immediate action is not necessary.
But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint and extend it towards the inside and towards the outside, to the right and to the left, for quickly returns and does not require any other treatment.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
This appears to be describing a procedure involving stretching or extending the patient's body. Let's break it down:
And let the extension of all of them be in one go, until the patient is raised from the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then all sorts of things must be done for the proper treatment.
In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the interior parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on their back; and then place the straps on the front of the thigh at the point between the head of the thigh and the location that is below the groin; and then extend the strap above the groin to the highest part of the fork.
And then another strong minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the injured thigh and extend it outward with great force, because that returns to its place.
And this is a lighter treatment by which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is resistant to you and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure entirely, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together strongly but lightly on both heels and both soles.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four words, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two words.
And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and that they are upright; and let their length from the ground be the quantity of two arms' lengths.
And immediately command a strong young man to cut off the head of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and let the other young man pull the cushion with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation outward from its original position, it is necessary that the patient lies on his back as we have recommended when they are swollen; and let the bandage be tightened strongly over the sick leg specifically and over their feet.
And immediately two posts should be placed: one under their feet, and the other under their head; and let the drape be wrapped around adjusted posts placed in the middle of the bed, so that the patient is not injured because the post is between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the sides does not pull.
And then each assistant stretches out on their side, and the physician with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is in front of the joint, it is necessary that the leg be slightly extended; and it is according to this same story placed on the stump; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the patient's ankle, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that pulling presses that which is extended behind towards the inner part of the knee.  />
And if the dislocation is behind the joint, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended backwards and raised off the ground; rather, it is better that he be placed on a hard surface, as is appropriate for elevation if his hip is dislocated towards the outside, as we have said about placing him over two hips; and it is on its face with its limbs extended, as we have said, it has no difference.
And it is necessary that a compress with a board be placed over the joint area.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the patient is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those hips and the patient stretches their leg and expands it without hesitation, then know that the member according to what is needed has returned — at that moment you place two cushions and put plaster and extract with a bandage so that the swelling is not increased in any of the parts; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
Then promptly remove the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
At that moment, if you see those hips equally, then know that the dislocation is already healed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and extract it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
Then promptly remove that, and make the patient delay in walking on each foot for several days, until they are comfortable.
Chapter .32
About the cure for dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the front parts outside, and to the front parts inside, and more towards the back parts than the front parts; and it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his leg with his thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he can extend his leg if possible; adhere your back to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make the shoulder adhere with your palms, and hold those between your said parts over his shoulder with strength, and another assistant extends his foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that his leg adheres to his thigh with effortless lightness.
Then bandage it and make the thigh adhere to the leg, and then bind them together at the same time with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of him to you is difficult, then administer strong extension with bandages as described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter 33.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated suddenly, and the dislocation occurs either at the inner or outer parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swelling towards the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its slight displacement is easy recovery, which is that it should be extended with ease by hand and wrapped until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when suddenly dislocated, it is necessary for you to stop the patient straight, and let him have a strong and vigorous servant behind his back in the middle of him.
And then you should take with your right hand the foot from the upper side, and with your left hand from the lower side of the foot at the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice more with the left hand, and then extend it with the left hand; and press the soles of the foot with the right hand below the knee without effort.
And do this two times as we have described.
And then press the soles of the foot to the calf the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore, if it returns once or twice in this manner, and you see the foot swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, because it will return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a strong rope on the ground, and let it slip between his thighs, and you have already wrapped cloth around him so that the patient does not hurt.
And then let the servant hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with their hands or with a band that lies on the top of the foot; and then let each servant extend against the extension of their partner, and let the rope be extended between the patient's thighs holding him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
And immediately the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy side below, because the dislocation returns easily.
And once the dislocation has returned and its healing reduction is evident to you, then place a plaster and fasten it strongly with bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you should be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not press on them strongly.
And then leave it alone for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, remove it.
And then unbind him on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if he is forced to move during that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and ruined on him, and then it will not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs to him, then you should administer to him the treatment that we have described earlier in another place of treatment and application, until it is healed.
**Chapter 34**
**On the Treatment of Dislocation of Toes.**
**It is recommended that the dislocated toe be bandaged with little tension without struggle; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.**
**However, if the dislocation is in any of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on a bench or table, and have him stand as if he were walking.**
**And then you should stand on the foot of the patient and place your foot over where you think the joint is, and then press down firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position, and you see that it is bandaged and does not appear prominent.**
**And then place under the sole of the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it with decent and firm strength for three days; and then unbind it and make the patient rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and healing is assured.**
**Chapter 35**
**On the Types of Dislocation that may be caused by a Wound or Fracture or Both.**
When some of these causes occur and you endeavor in the treatment of it and the restoration of him, many times death follows.
And for that reason it is not proper to presume over his treatment except by someone who is wise in the art, with long experience, compassionate and merciful, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning medicines that check inflammations cautiously, and leaves the patient to divine judgment unless you expect recovery from destruction, and with relief of the illness, and in which some hope appears. And therefore strive first to bring about his reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an inflammation.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that will check inflammation and cure the wound with what is appropriate from the drying ointments.
And if there is dislocation with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should attempt to bring them together, and do what we have said in the cases of simple injuries that preceded these places.
And beware and avoid according to your ability that which leads to the paths of fear as I have predicted for you; for this is better for you, more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text: Amen.
