"Oh, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by completing it its end is achieved, and by its expositions, and by its explanations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, that is surgery.
"For the operation with the hand is rejected in our region and in our time of all privation, until very little remains of its science, and its traces are erased; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed the most and have become errors and confusions, to the point that their intentions are closed and its power and art are weakened.
"And it seems to me that I revive it with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as it is by addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
This text discusses the difficulty of finding a good physician in the present time due to the length and complexity of medical training. It emphasizes that to be proficient in medicine, one must have extensive knowledge of anatomy, including the structure and function of various body parts, their connections and separations, and the number and arrangement of bones, nerves, sinews, and blood vessels (both pulsatile and quiet ones). The author also mentions the importance of understanding the places where these vessels emerge. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that it is not just a word, but small in name and greater in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will fall into error by which men die, as I have seen happen too often, because some are trained in this science and then cast it aside without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician cut into an ulcerous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he also cut some arteries in the neck, causing a great deal of blood to flow until the woman fell dead into his hands.
And I saw another physician who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had developed an issue in his bladder; the stone was large, and it came out with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I myself was called to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took payment of a duc from our land for surgery, and he treated a negro castrato who had a fracture in his thigh; and the physician, with his ignorance, extracted the fracture through the wound with cushions and bandages with strong compression, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then you unbind him according to his wishes, and then you rebinding him, and then you leave him dry for several days, and command that we do not bind the bandage; and this way we proceed until the swelling in his foot is abated, and it reaches a state of healing.
And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus his tranquility was achieved, and similarly he admitted to his pains.
But since the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be restrained, and ceased to spread the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who punctured a cancerous swelling, and it became ulcerated after several days, until the evil of it was increased by the lord of him.
The reason for this is that the black cancer is entirely of melancholic humors, and it is not necessary to have iron in all parts, but rather in the member which feels all of it.
And therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand should be carried out in two ways: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work involving great risk in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already mentioned this in every place of this book where an operation is performed that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to watch out for this and avoid it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
And therefore, take up your weapons with care and under the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way with God's grace for them to attain health and praiseworthy success, and avoid the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons away from what causes you fear, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not elude you: for it is more beneficial to your glory, and both now and later, to your sanctity.
I have already said this in some of my previous works: "Do not treat evil patients, lest you be called evil doctors.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first chapter. The first chapter concerns the head, specifically the forms of instruments and the irons of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
"The division of the second section. "The second chapter, on cupping and incision, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and arranged according to the forms of the instruments.
"The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter arranged from the head to the feet, and on the forms of the instruments.
"I want to say what are the advantages and disadvantages of that type of cautery, and in which circumstances it is forbidden.
"So I say that the discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of cautery is a long and complex discourse, subtle in its knowledge and secretly hidden; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and only a little of their discussions reaches me, fearing to be too lengthy.
"And therefore I say that you should perform cautery in every circumstance, whether it involves matter or not, except for two circumstances, which are cold and dry conditions without matter.
In this case of cold and dry illness with matter, it is necessary to remember; because some say that cautery is helpful for that, while others say the opposite of that, that cautery is not suitable for an illness caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a cold and dry illness be healed with something hot and dry.
Say the opposite of that, that through cautery there is improvement in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the man's body to be cold.
And I say by the words of that, that experience has revealed this to me many times before.
However, it is not necessary to discuss this matter further with someone who has already been instructed and practiced in the chapter on cautery through previous practice, and who knows the diversity of men's constitutions, the disposition of their illnesses within them, the causes of those illnesses, their accidents, and the time course of those illnesses.
But in other constitutions, there is no need to fear, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, because all physicians have agreed on these, and they are not disagreed upon in the improvement with cautery in those cases.
And know, children, that the secret of treatment through cautery with fire and its goodness lies in that the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is being cauterized, and it does no harm to the other members connected to it except for a small injury.
But the action of medicine cautery reaches those members that are close to it, and it easily brings about difficult healing in the sick member and is quickly applied.
But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but burn away superfluous matter. And it is known to us through experience and the long service of study in this art concerning the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of this discourse. And if it were not that it is not written in my book, here I would reveal to you a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical reasoning, which would be suitable for your intellects.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is suitable to perform cautery and they establish the best time as spring.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the damage from an accidental moment is submerged in the help of what is drawn with the cautery, and especially if the cauterization is for painful or necessary pains, forces, and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest something worse should come from them, which is greater than a minor injury entering through time.
And this is what is in your minds, or sons, that only the common people and foolish doctors think so, since the illness that is cured by cauterization does not return at all times, and they claim that consequence.
And the reason is not as they think, because cauterization is only used in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the moisture that causes pain.
However, cauterization exceeds medicine in effectiveness due to its strength and the power of its operation, as well as the greatness of its practitioner.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as the patient's strength and what has been prepared in their body from the accumulation of superfluidities, and what they have acquired through their diet and similar causes. However, if the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery for toothache and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return in them, but this is done rarely.
And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is a true statement, as I understand it, because I believe there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other means except through cautery.
And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when the ways of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not succeed, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it benefits in this. And from here, I conclude that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not for any other reason than for the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as if this were absolutely true. For I have proven and found that this is not so in all bodies, but only in some without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you make cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a burn. And if you put a fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and some sheets fall into the fire by which the craftsman loses his occupation.
Here's my attempt at translating that line into English:
Here is the translation of the given text into English:
"The first chapter.
"This cauterization treats coldness and dampness in the body, which are the two causes of many ailments. It is effective against headaches, excessive earwax, persistent yawning, toothaches, sore throats, and generally any illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, fever, stroke, and similar conditions.
"The method for this cauterization is as follows: firstly, instruct the patient to take a laxative medication to cleanse the bowels for three or four nights, depending on the patient's strength, age, and habits.
"And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that person sit between your hands on a low bench, and have them place their feet on the ground.
"Then place the sharp edge of your palm close to the bridge of the nose between the patient's eyes. "However, when your finger reaches the middle of the forehead, mark that spot with a needle. Then heat the cautery stick, which should be olive-shaped like this:
And then you place it on the affected area with a tent, in such a way that it descends, and with which the left hand is gently pressed, little by little, and you turn it over.
And then you lift your hand slightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone already exposed, even as small as a grain of millet, then raise your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron, or another one like it, until the bone is visible as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it in water, and leave it on the area for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on the area until the scab of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the area with Tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
And they say that the more open the wound remains, the better the arm gets, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized up to the bone, and that the cautery should be held there until a piece of the bone's appearance is burnt.
And immediately remove that which is adjacent to the bone, and immediately treat it.
And others say that with the cautery one should reach to the very back, until it presses strongly on the bone, to the point that the bone breaks, and this is the form of a small operation. And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head are released.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men due to fear; and that one, I think, is better with health than without it, because the head is opened by solving its continuity just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one works and performs the task healthily.
Chapter two.
On the cautery of the head.
When persistent and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient who has used poultices, plasters, head purges, ointments, lotions, caps, helmets, hoods, and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not benefit him at all from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds great cold, then that one should be cauterized again with another cautery near that one a little. And then cauterize that area on the horn of his head with a pointed cautery until the caul is cut off. Cut the caul and expose the bone in the amount we've measured. Cauterize that area with a pointed cautery on the back part of the head in the place called the 'vas', which is where the cupping glass is placed. And be gentle in doing this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say that this cautery should be in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more delicate than the one used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its shape.
Next chapter.
On the cautery for non-chronic migraine.
When there is severe pain in the head or when pain spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purgative medications and other remedies as I have described in the treatment of diseases; and if that does not help, then cautery can be performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Here's my attempt at translating the sentence: And then cut the painful area on the temple with a sharp lance until it is fully opened, until it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to him with a poultice to relieve the constriction, and leave it there for three hours; then remove it and draw it out, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then place over him a compress soaked in wine until the area begins to heal.
And then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
And if you wish, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
But perform cauterization with iron according to this manner: take a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a nail-head, because its head is like the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protuberance.
And then place it on the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the iron rod which is behind does not get burned — and rotate the iron slowly with speed.
And if the quantity that is burned by the point of the rod is such that it is most of it, lift your hand so that the vein which is behind does not get burned, lest there be a flow of blood.
And then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it on the area, leaving it there for three days; and then place a soft cloth with an edge, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the lancet as for a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this ancient practice.
Chapter four.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
When you treat migraine with the water method we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit from the treatment, and sometimes because the illness is not cured by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the lancet until it is white-hot, since you indicate on the place of pain with a line the length of which is the majority of the finger, or as much as that; and place your hand firmly once and strongly hold it until you do not cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and that the tendon is not cut and the nerves which move that, and that a spasm does not occur.
This is a challenging text due to its archaic language and potential use of medical terminology specific to the time period in which it was written. Here's my attempt at translating it:
And I come with the recollection of the treatment for blood flow issues related to archery, according to its method, in this section of the book.
And if you see that this treatment does not suffice and the body of the patient can tolerate it, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on archery wounds with a two-pronged cautery, which is considered a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter V
On Cauterizing Ear Pain
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the pointed cautery, which is called "punctum." Its form is as follows:
And then pierce close to the bone, and let it be guided around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circumference of each area if the pain is in each one. Proceed with the cautery from the base of the ear, little by little, further than where you sense the location with your finger.
"And if you make cautery points on both ears and remove them, then proceed to heal the areas until they are healed.
"Chapter 6.
"On the Cauterization of Torture
"Torture that is cured and can be treated with cauterization is only from the toxins that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
"Avoid cauterizing the toxin that comes from dryness or nerve spasm.
"When you cure this type of torture with jars, clysters, and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
"And place your cautery against the opposite side of the affected part, because softening only occurs in the area that appears healthy.
"And the method of cauterization is to cauterize with a cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, slightly higher than the horn of the head, and another on the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and hold your hand with the cautery until the amount equivalent to half the thickness of the little finger is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is like a small knife, the shape of which is placed in front of the table. However, it must be more subtle than that one, somewhat like a needle; and it is necessary to remove some of its excess thickness.
Then care for the area with water until it has healed.
Chapter VII
On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy
When apoplexy is old and you are treating it with the water we mentioned earlier, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on all four corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape of the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done as described above.
And if it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach, and this is more recent, then care for it with water that has been processed.
Chapter VIII
On the Cauterization of Forgetfulness Caused by Burns
It is necessary to give the patient, at the beginning, large doses and pills that serve as purgatives.
Based on the provided examples, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And pause for some time, because that is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to that medical order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if by that [method] the patient is healed; and if not, then make three cauteries on the lower part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery for as long as it takes to recite the Lord's Prayer, and then cure the cautery with water that has been prepared [for this purpose].
But if you see an increase in the patient's condition, and they are tolerating it well, then make a cautery in the middle of the forehead; and if the condition is more severe, then cauterize that [area] above the two eyebrows.
Then cure it until it has healed; and let the cauteries be olive-sized, according to the method described above.
Chapter IX
On Cauterization of the Parotid Glands and Softening of the Entire Body
First, you should perform a cleansing of the head with cupping and water as we have described; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and with cauteries on all the forehead, and with cauteries on the back of the head, and with three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
And if in the illness of excessive softness of the body and the patients are suffering greatly from this strong illness, then cauterize with four cauteries on the spine, and continue with cautery until the skin is charred, and raise your hand. And then heal him until he is cured, and this should be called olive cautery.
Chapter 10
On the Cautery of Epilepsy.
Do not cauterize the epileptic unless his epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at its beginning with yarrow and the other cure that we mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from the rejection of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicine, then administer gargles and swallowing agents that cleanse the throat, first for several days with improvement of the food.
Then shave the head of the patient and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on the occiput of his head, and over each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply a pointed cautery to them with the tools I have mentioned earlier, ensuring that there is partial paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And perform an olive-sized cautery as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then apply the cautery with partial paralysis as mentioned before.
And if the cause of melancholy is a declining superfluity that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to cleanse their brain as described in the previous division.
And shave the patient's head, and fashion a modest tonsure on them over the crown, and place that in the middle of their head.
And let the patient be seated upright, and be supported from all sides.
And apply a liniment; and it is more fitting to use old ewe's fat. Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a possible translation of the sentence: And then take that [instrument] and place it in the middle of their head, and pierce them so they are penetrated.
And do this with the patient for one whole week, with the other good regimen until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to their strength, as long as you have a hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
And then wrap that area with a bandage soaked in vinegar or goose grease.
Chapter XII
About the cauterization of water descending into the eye
When you have determined the beginning of water in the eye by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
And make them soak in a warm bath for several days.
Then command him to shave his head and cauterize that [area] with a cautery in the middle of his head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning is the issuing of water from both eyes, or with one stroke if it is the beginning of water from one eye.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And beware of blood flow when cauterized; and if you see blood flowing from them, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I come with knowledge in the extraction of arrows and in the absorption of those and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones using two very sharp cauteries.
Chapter .xiii.  (The translation of "Capitol" is "Chapter")
About cauterizing old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the most visible part of the head outside, and it is verified that this is an excess of phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as we have mentioned in the beginning chapter about water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck between the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between the bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize that along the entire length of the tail of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
This line indicates that what follows is the 14th chapter or section of the text. In modern terms, it would be similar to writing "Chapter 14.
This translates to:
When you treat that person with the remedy we mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink cock's combs for three nights; and then shave their head, and cauterize them with a pointed cautery, half with olive oil. And then cauterize that person with a rosemary-infused cautery, using two cauteries on the two eyebrows just below the hairline, a little.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is how you make the rosemary-infused cautery:
Chapter XV
About making an eye ointment to soften the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is how you make it:
And if you do so, cauterize that (area) on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in every part, and they should be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that one third of the eyelid is burnt.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelashes turn inward and puncture the eye, use cautery on the eyelid.
When the eyelashes of the eye turn inward so that they puncture the eye, cautery is performed in two ways: either by burning or with a caustic medicine.
If you are cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let their eyelashes grow long and curled like those who pluck them; and if you puncture that [area], then strengthen his eyes with a bandage so that it is not worsened until the eyelashes have grown back. ething.
Therefore, once they have grown and curled, place the patient's head on your lap, and then make a sign over the eyelids of his eyes with a tent, in the shape of a holly leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the eyelashes.
Then place a cotton swab dipped in egg white or a paste of lentils over the eye.
Then ignite the cautery, which should be shaped like this.
It appears that the provided text is in an old form of Catalan, which shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the given sentence line by line into English:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E levanta tu mano y déjalo así durante tres días, y luego coloca un cojín sobre él con una venda hasta que se cure la herida. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if it returns through the hairs for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again on that spot just as you did originally.
But if the hairs are on the edge of the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
But apply the cauterizing medication as a combustible agent; this is what you should command the patient to do: let him pluck the hairs until they are lengthened and healed, and then make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take a known soap and some live coals, and if you don't have that, then mix those substances well together, and do this quickly so it doesn't get cold; and then spread some of that water over the bandage which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one eye or both; and place under the eye a pad soaked in egg white, and let the patient's head be in your hands.
And place the poultice over the medicine and press it lightly, without removing it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire in him.
And as soon as he perceives that he has found the bite, then remove the medicine and replace it with a clean cloth; and when the bite ceases, then reapply the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider whether you see the eyelid lifted as if washed by constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it has not been applied, and do not remove it until your operation is complete and the wound is healed.
Then place a pad over the area with a border until the swelling of the edema is gone, and then treat it with a healing ointment or another one until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to keep watch with great diligence that no part of the medicine falls into the wound; and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened, and any hairs fall into the wound, then reapply your medicine to the place where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at first, and then clean it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that human feet are differentiated by size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
And the path to correctness will not be hidden from those who study this art.
Chapter XVII
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the foot.
When you treat a fistula with the water we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it in this manner: order the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let another servant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken by his head.
And then place cotton soaked in egg white or crushed pepper on the patient's foot.
And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:
The one that is convex, in the shape of a reed or vulture feather, with which the cautery is made.
And if you want it to be, let it penetrate into the other end. And if you wish it to be so as intended.
But nevertheless, that which is hollow is better for your work.
Then promptly press the fistula if it is open, and from it let out sanies and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place over it the pointed cautery which is well lit, and with that your hand a little behind the point of the cautery near the nose, so that your hand does not err or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and corrupt it.
And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place over that spot a bandage and surround it with drying ointment until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place over it a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shave it as necessary according to its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier people said: go to the place of the fistula and open it up, and then immediately place in that fissure a thin thread of which the shape is like this: And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with the thread with good control, so that the patient is not disturbed because the melted lead does not reach the head of that; and it is necessary to place over the head of the patient a spot covered in egg white or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
"Chapter XVIII
"On Cauterizing the Foot's Wound.
"Many times these splits occur in the lips, and mostly in children's lips.
"Therefore, when you treat those splits with the water we mentioned in the sections, and if your treatment is not effective, then burn with a small pointed cautery like this:
"And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
"Then place this [cautery] carefully in those splits until the heat of the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
"And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
"Chapter XIX
"On Cauterizing a Fistula in the Mouth.
"When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes swollen, and then bursts, and becomes chronic, and foul pus exudes, creating a fistula, and if you treat it and the treatment is not effective, then you should burn with a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. And place this burning cautery in the hole of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the heated iron reaches its depth; at the end of this process, do so one or two times; and then treat it with the water we mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And therefore, if the wound is cut open and heals, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones according to their chapter.
Chapter 20
On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on your knees, and quickly heat the cautery in the shape that will be shown to you later, so that you place the small point on the tooth and immediately insert the heated cautery into it, holding your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire directly at the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop it, because the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupting moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21
This phrase appears to describe a medical procedure involving tooth pain. A literal translation could be:
When tooth pain is caused by cold, or there is a splinter or worm, and you do not treat it with medicine, then cauterize the area according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's hoof or cauterize with fire.
Cauterizing with a hoof is done by taking a cow's hoof and burning it in the embers of iron, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of the tent peg, then immerse that wrapped tent peg in the burned hoof, and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it becomes cold.
And then repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned hoof, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of that until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the needle of iron or steel, and it should have some thickness in its center so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the desired shape, and place it on the tooth and hold it with your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will diminish either that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that, by pressing with that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good drink and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the method of cauterization.
And you should cauterize with whatever extreme measures are possible for you to do.
And this is the method of using the cannula:
Chapter XXII
On the Cauterization of Prolapse
When prolapse is caused by phlegm and cold humors and does not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish to achieve mild digestion of these [humors], then heat the cautery with the following shape: it has two openings, one for the smoke to exit, and place the burning end on the prolapse once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the core of the prolapse.
And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the prolapse, and leave it for three days, and then apply a poultice soaked in wine until what has been burned by the fire is removed.
And then treat it with ointments, compresses, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On cauterizing raw vocal cords and constricting the airway.
When moisture comes upon the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of the pleura, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with purgative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that part of the throat where it is pressed.
And be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery or burn too much of his windpipe.
And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in his last vertebra. And let the cautery be clamped as was done previously.
And afterwards care for that part with the water mentioned before until it is healed.
Chapter 24
On cauterizing illnesses of the lung and coughing.
When cough and lung illness are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed, fleshy places; and with another cautery in the middle of the sole between two small bones; and let the cauteries be clamped as was done previously.
If you wish, let your cautery point be with the pointed instrument called "punctum," the form of which should precede in the treatment of earache pain.
And let the points be placed within those; and then cure that with water that has been used previously until it is healed.
And the pointed instrument should have three tips, for cautery is done with it: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cautery of the little finger, which is called the "titillus.
When the little finger is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not remain in place upon its return, you must reduce the dislocation until it returns to normal. Then, by a small movement, it should be dislocated back into place, as we have shown. Therefore, firstly, you must reduce the dislocation. And then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; and then raise the heel which is in the inner part of the little finger upwards with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then heat the pointed instrument that has two points; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cautery will be that of four holes made by the cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place some fine salt on the cauteries, and then make sure the patient remains still, and that the limb is not moved for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and it is done late, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened and the moisture is dried out and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26
Of stomach cautery.
When coldness and moisture increase in the stomach until it is expelled from its natural place and many raumases appear on it, and if you continue with the same treatment methods and they do not help, then it is necessary to lay the patient on their back, extend their hands and feet, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries below each rib of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cautery becomes triangular; and let those which are not adjusted cause pustules.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the heel.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this figure without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this figure:
And the stomach should be cauterized with points at those places where you fear this cautery may have effects: and it is that you know about the stomach with a tentative point according to the amount that you want, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the points; and then treat that area with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of the frozen foot.
When the foot experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, or excessive windiness such that its normal condition is disturbed by an excessive outflow, and if you have treated the patient with the water we mentioned before, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated. Examine with a tentative cautery three times in this manner and in this quantity, placing them on the foot below the hypochondriac region, which corresponds to the male recumbent position.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press the cauterizing iron too much.
And if the amount of water that is needed is equal to half the thickness of a rope, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit down, having already spread out their clothes, and raised their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a lancet-like cautery, when you are skillful and prudent in this art.
And be careful not to cauterize too deeply, and let the thickness of the entire rope be considered so that the whole body is cauterized and reaches into the intestines, because the rope here is thin; and know this.
Chapter .28.
On the incision of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When you want to incise or open an abscess on the foot and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without acuteness.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain being severe and sometimes exhausting doctors' efforts to cure it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back; then mark the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery that resembles a razor, whose shape was shown on the previous page. And cauterize with it and burn until all the pus is consumed, until it reaches the depths, until it begins to bleed.
Then treat that one for the healing of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except that which has been prolonged in the art of medicine and with which most sick people are familiar; however, some have dared to experiment with this procedure, but nevertheless we must leave that to you, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX
Of the Cautery of Pleurisy
The ancients used to say that the cautery of the pleura caused by cold humors should be done in this manner: take a long, dry reed from the family of rushes, one that is pointed and thin, like the size of a finger.
And then submerge that (the area) in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize that place with a cautery between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly inclined towards the area under the chin, and with two cauteries on the area that is slightly inclined between the fifth rib and the twelfth, inclined a little towards the back areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries in the back areas; and with one cautery in the place that is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the feet, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And it should not be that you grasp the cautery with your hand, but rather it should be in the open area of the sheath in plain view.
And some ancient ones said that some of the men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and fiery in that area, and they put it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches with that to that abscess and the pus is expelled, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
In this perforation with a cautery, there is fear because one can die immediately if it happens in the place of a fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen with the water we have mentioned in the treatment section and your treatment does not work, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is that you should make three or four cautery marks along the length of the spleen, following the pattern of the cautery marks on the liver, whose figure has been shown previously.
And let there be a distance between each cautery mark of about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have said for the liver, likewise.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on their back.
And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two outpourings, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the rib that is located on the left side of the spleen where the patient is lying.
Here's a possible translation of the sentence:
And then insert both needles, carefully, into that space where with those you will penetrate the vein of the other part.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
And if you see [that there are still issues], cauterize again with a cautery having three needles.
And then you care for the cauteries because they have been in place for too many days, for it is more convenient than the other previously mentioned causes of the treatment.
Chapter .31
On the Cauterization of Dropsy Patients
Do not perform cautery on dropsy patients, but rather on those who are properly dried out.
When you care for the dropsy patient using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another on the spleen, and another on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And let the depth of the cauterization be appropriate to the thickness of the vein.
And then lay down the open cautery so that you may hold the arm for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of their treatment immediately after cautery with the water that is needed so that two intentions are added to them, and then quickly help them with healing aid.
The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be pointed like the one mentioned before, and it should be oval in shape for cauterizing the back as described previously.
Chapter .xxxii.
On the Cautery of Feet and Joints.
When the feet are swollen from dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; and then lift your hand, and do not bring it all the way down, because the serous fluid will reflux.
The cautery should be done in this way: Then make two cauteries on both joints, and each joint should have a cautery done with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the joint: one above the knuckle and the other below the middle of the joint; and on each joint, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water flows out of it.
Then treat them with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII
Of the Cauterization of the Body's Abdomen.
When the body's abdomen is affected by cold and humidity, which weaken the powers (virtues) such as the digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with the various methods of treatment mentioned earlier. And sometimes the patient will suffer from an excess of power, at which point cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as previously described for stomach cauterization, along with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as a subtle needle cautery; or alternatively, a cautery on the skin over a large vein, or two cauteries.
And if the humidities are excessive and the patient cannot tolerate them, then cauterize him on the bladder and intestines, and firmly place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin area, as this is a perfect cure from which there will be no error.
The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language, possibly Occitan or another variant of Old French. Here's a translation attempt for "Capitol .xxxiv.":
About the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids due to thick cold humors or corrupt moisture, and they have been treated with the water we mentioned in the division but do not show signs of healing, then cauterize with three cauteries below the small of the back, placing them in a small triangular shape, and also cauterize above the navel with two incisions.
And if you suspect that his stomach is cold and his food is not digested, and his face often appears pale, then cauterize the corresponding point on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on his gallbladder with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time and then treat him until he is cured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Concerning the cauterization of tumors near their abscess.
When you cut into a tumor, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut tumor, and continue until you reach the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this one or two times, because if the veins are too large, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water from the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part of the body, it is more useful as a remedy.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when some vein has a fistula occurring naturally within it and is chronic, with corrupt blood and humors flowing out, then the most worthy thing to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then recognize the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. And then insert the heated cautery into this fistula according to the quantity in which you inserted the probe.
And repeat with the cautery on that spot until those corrupt bodies are burned once or twice or three times, according to your need. xspace
And be careful not to cause burning of the nerves or veins; or if there is a fistula in the bladder or intestines, then avoid those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in fleshy and soft parts where it does not penetrate.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials removed from it remain that way for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or that its bone has become rotten, or because of those causes which will cause a recurrence in that area.
Chapter XXXVII
On the Cautery of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or great heat, and for this reason the patient's anus is numb, then it is necessary to cauterize those (hemorrhoids) on the anus with a hot cautery on each hemorrhoid, using a needle of which you will need the reminder.
And strongly cauterize with the second one a little deeper, so that there will be three lined cauteries, and thus they will be more useful in helping.
The translation of "Capitol .xxxviii." is "Chapter 38".
"On Cauterization of the Bladder.
"When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the abdomen below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, using a hot iron on the right side and another on the left side.
"And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the patient's navel; and cauterize him also in the lower back with a hot iron, or with two irons if necessary.
"And let the cauteries be done with a pointed iron as needed.
"Chapter 39
"On Cauterization of the Uterus.
"When the uterus is affected by cold and moisture, making intercourse difficult, menstrual flow becomes corrupt, delayed, or painful, then the area should be cauterized with three irons around the navel, as we have said in the case of bladder cautery; and also cauterize below the back with one iron, or two if necessary, and let the cauteries be done with a pointed iron.
It seems like the text you provided is starting with "Capitol .xl." which translates to "Chapter 40" in English. This indicates that the text is divided into chapters, and this particular section is the 40th chapter of the medieval medical treatise. Without additional context or content from the next lines, I can't provide a more detailed translation, but based on the pattern you've shown, each line would be translated sequentially as it appears. If you have more text to translate, please continue, and I will assist you with each line accordingly.
Of the cauterization for ankle dislocation.
When mucus is infused in the part of the ankle and this causes its displacement from its place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared to each other. And the place of the dislocation is found in it which is swollen.
Therefore, you should cauterize the patient over the affected part of the ankle with a circular iron, because you will have a sign with the probe in the circle of the place as it is turned around, and so that the place falls exactly in the middle of the circle.
And let the iron be of the same form as in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this iron is not available to you, then cauterize with three irons, using a large olive-sized iron.
And let the cautery be done according to the thickness of the entire tendon; and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter 41
On Cauterizing the Sciatic Vein
When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and dampness, the patient is treated with the water we have mentioned before, and no other remedy should be given, for this treatment is ancient. Therefore, you must first purge the patient of gross humors using either fetid pills or artificial pills; then cauterize the affected area.
There are two methods for cauterizing in this case: cauterization with burning medicines or cauterization with fire.
According to two well-known methods, one of which involves cauterizing the affected area of the ankle with three triangular cauteries like this; and you should make a good depth with them. The space between each cautery should be the width of the tip of your finger, whether you use an olive-sized or larger cautery.
However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed halfway up the shin, because there are four cauteries in total.
And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circular shape used in the treatment of ankle dislocation, ensuring that the circle is continuous and burns the entire circumference.
"And this is the manner of cauterization in hernia when the pain adheres to the ring and does not extend into the scrotum.
"But if the pain extends into the scrotum, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the scrotum at the place where you direct the patient, which is the pain; and with one cautery on the testicle for four times a little above the posterior part.
"And if you use a lancet for cauterization, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the scrotal skin.
"And if the patient directs that the pain has extended to the place near the testicles, then cauterize it here where he directs with a cautery for three or four times, or more if needed.
"And if the patient directs that the pain is below the anus towards the scrotum, then cauterize it here with a lancet.
"And be careful in all cauterization that you do not burn too deeply with the lancet so as to damage nerves or large blood vessels, and thus cause harm or injury to the patient.
"And I have seen one or two of those who cauterized on the testicle and burned too deeply, and the foot became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and completely corrupted. And then there is a sudden release of the stomach, and this is death.
And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise men said in the cauterization of water, this is the manner: make a circle of iron, the circumference of which is half a palm; and its holes should be according to the thickness of a finger or less.
And inside that circle there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the width of a thumb; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of those sticks should be one thumb or two thumbs, and make the edges of iron decently finished on the circles; and this is its shape:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red and starts to throw sparks, and then place it on the watery part, with the patient lying on their side. And so cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; and then dress that with a poultice, leaving the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence:
It appears that this text is written in a language that combines elements from Latin and Romance languages, possibly a form of medieval Occitan or Catalan. Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
And if the space that is between each quantity of the thickness of the said [part]; and they are opened below and above, and they are such that they contain each other according to this form:
And then place the patient lying on their side, and press your hand on the affected area; and then take some hot water and pour it between two basins (or containers), and let the heat of that water increase gradually, and hold it for about an hour, so that the patient endures the burning and scalding — because this remedy burns like fire — until the burning ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the affected area with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place a border over it until the blackness of the burn fades away, and let that be for some days, and scabies will run off from there; this is for aid.
And then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done on the hand likewise.
This is the method of applying hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of lime and eggshells, both finely crushed together in equal parts, and strain them to place in a new vessel, through which the mixture can be poured little by little, according to the amount that enters into it.
Then place another vessel underneath the first one, and pour over it lime and eggshells double their volume of warm water, which covers them by about a finger's width. After compressing them well with your hand, let the sharp water from above drain into the lower vessel through the hole.
Then immediately adjust all that water and pour it over another batch of warm eggshells and fresh lime, because at this point it will have a very strong acidity, which is used in many medical operations and for cauterizing other limbs, as it has the effect of fire.
And so with some medicines, such as honey, vinegar and soap, which should be mixed together.
And Galen recounts the operation and treatment of a man from antiquity with which pain of water and sciatica is cured, and he said that no other treatment was needed, because it is cured once, as he recounted, for when he entered the bath, he came out healthy.  />
And it is that a piece of fresh verbena be taken; and if verbena is not found, then take a recent fig; and let it be chopped with a little gray [salt] and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the cavity, or in the thigh, and bind it.
And let it be left for the duration of three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the application.
And then place that [patient] in a bath and when their body is reddened, immerse them in the cold water, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these remedies except for the purpose of purging the body.
However, Hippocrates said that when the varicose vein of a goat is cauterized, it benefits him more; and the cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
And then take dry goat dung and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place that on the wool and press it until it is spread out. And repeat this action, and do not stop doing so until the feeling of biting reaches into the ankle and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cows.
Chapter XLII.
On the Cauterization for Back Pain
Sometimes pain in the back is due to many causes, such as falling or striking, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infiltration of cold and wet matter.
Cautery is only effective in this particular type caused by the infiltration of cold matter.
Therefore, first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar to them, which should be made on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its size, as each line has ten cauteries or more, according to the patient's tolerance and strength.
And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four with a median-sized nail cautery in this manner:
Chapter XLIII.
About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Many observations indicate that this illness affects mainly small children; and a sign of its onset in children is that they experience convulsions or movements in the upper extremities during sleep.
And you will find in the last vertebra of the back and in the nape of the neck that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery like this: so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, you can also cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three times. And let the points be close together.
And then carefully treat the area until it is healed as we have said.
But be careful not to apply cautery in cases of jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, doctors typically call this gout.
And thus, when gout is treated with care due to coldness and the pains are not relieved, then apply cautery.
Therefore, you cauterize that appropriate location around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
And it should be cauterized in this way:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries in total, using this type of cautery.
And if multiple cauteries are necessary, then cauterize the area, but do not press too hard with the cautery; just let the tip touch the skin.
And if the pain spreads to the toe and the foot, then administer the cautery as described in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and is called "suagra", then prick around the fingernails like this: prick along these two lines.
And if pain remains in the fingers, then prick around the fingernails of each finger and at the base of the hand.
And if the pain worsens after several days in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize each of those parts with fire from the assistant's tool.
And do not evacuate the patient of good diet and reception of medicine, because if good diet is maintained and the humor is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When there is a rupture in the belly and the intestines protrude through the wound, as if they are coming out, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use lenitive remedies so that the opening in their belly does not increase.
Then follow the patient and hold them with your hands on their back, and command him to keep his breath until the intestine or the bowel is expelled or appears.
Then return with these words and instructions, attempting to close the wound on the bones of the pelvis, marking the end of which should resemble half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
Then heat the cautery which has this shape:
"Until it is completely red and sparkling. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand steadily holding the cautery upright, and apply heat until you reach the bones of the little toe in the middle of the foot; and repeat this action one more time if you have not achieved it in the first application.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cauterization, to ensure that you do not burn the intestine and cause death or other serious illness in the patient.
And know that if with the cautery you do not touch the bones, your operation will be ineffective.
And it is important that the cautery for children should be fine according to their size and age.
Then care for the cauterized area for three days with a bandage until the char of the fire is removed.
And then care for him with other ointments until he is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days, until the area and the wound are sealed.
And it is necessary to adjust the patient's diet according to the length of time they are being treated, so as not to strain their stomach and prevent the intestines from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And then when you want to remove it after about 40 days, administer a well-prepared poultice, and keep it for another 40 days.
And he should abstain from work and excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when following this complete regimen of healing, he will certainly be healed.
And I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let what is excreted from the gut also be like the third part of it. And then care for him as we have said, and it will not close.
And some of the earlier ones say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tenth:
And a line is placed that runs through the length of the back, above the rupture, and another line below it; and you place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI
On Cauterizing Hernia
When pain in certain members persists due to injury or bruising and this pain endures for a long time and you do not heal it with medicine, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be adapted to each member according to its size and smallness, thickness and thinness, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary that these pains are transmitted from one member to another nearby, so you must capture them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII
On Cauterizing Leprosy
Some lepers are greatly helped by cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
And therefore when you wish to cauterize that area, consider if the leprosy is common and if it has been treated with the water we mentioned in the division, and neither say nor do this. Be mindful over the patient that corruption may spread throughout their body and entire complexion. In such a case, cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, the second lower than the first, at the hairline; and two on the temples; and one at the back, on the nape or occiput.
And finish with your hand and the cauteries a little deeper, pressing into the bone to make a slight indentation, which will displace the scabs and thereby alleviate the expulsion of thick vapors from him; and cauterize on the spleen as needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades of the neck, and six cauteries on the shoulder blades of the back, and one large one on the shoulder blades near the spine, and one on the spine, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels and one on each heel, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrists, and two on the knuckles of the hands, and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole [of the foot], so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the chest.
And know that the more precisely you apply the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cauterization itself, just as his servants do, because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as has been established by the types of surgical instruments.
Then cure the cauterized area with flour mixed with honey and with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII
On Cauterization for Stroke
When a member is stunned or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the tendon. And then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
And sometimes the area is cauterized where there are numbness or tingling sensations in the hands and feet, in the vertebrae of the back, around the eyes of the nerves that govern those limbs, and the numbness is removed.
But do not attempt this unless one is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX
About the cauterization of blisters that have formed.
When a blister is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize that area with a pointed cautery for a short period of time according to the size of the head of the blister, until the whiteness and color of it are removed and its color has changed.
And then care for it with a poultice made of barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and pigeon blood or swallow blood, each being one part, all mixed together. Then a cloth is soaked in this mixture and placed on the area until it heals.
"Capitulum Primus" or "Chapter One". This phrase indicates that we are starting with the first section of the medical treatise.
"About the Cauterization of Cancer." This sentence is likely the title of Chapter One, discussing the medieval medical treatment for cancer through the use of cautery.
"When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery around its circumference in such a way that it is completely burned." This sentence provides instructions on how to treat cancer using cauterization in medieval medicine.
"And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the affected area; but I have not seen this done, because I fear it might cause an ulceration, and indeed I have seen this happen on several occasions." This sentence expresses a differing opinion on how to apply the cautery, highlighting potential risks and personal observations.
"And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we have said, or with many small cauteries." This sentence reinforces the initial advice on how to apply the cautery for treating cancer.
"Chapter Two
"About the Cauterization of Ablepsia (a condition causing blindness)." This sentence introduces Chapter Two, which focuses on treating ablepsia using cautery in medieval medical practices.
"When some ablepsia is delayed in healing, and this is due to an excess of humor causing it, or because the patient's condition is poor, being old and frail with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten its healing; then cauterize around it with many small points; and then leave it alone, as it will hasten in healing." This sentence describes how to treat delayed healing of ablepsia using cautery.
If you wish to perform perforation on the patient with a cautery, then heat up the cautery, whose shape is like this: and place it in the middle of the abdomen until the needle penetrates.
And if you place the cautery in that area which is lower, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .52
About cauterization of ulcers.
An ulcer is a corruption moving through the body, which corrupts it like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a place suitable for cautery with fire, then heat up the points of iron needles, and make them large or small according to what is suitable for that location where the ulcer is.
And then cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated all corruption and nothing of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas a dressing soaked in oil mixed with honey until all scabs are removed and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with a flesh-regenerating ointment.
Certainly! Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, because that is considered half of a cautery. But however, the cautery with fire is of more gentle help.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have difficulty with him.
Chapter 33
Of the cauterization of closures and other similar conditions.
Many times it is seen in the feet of those suffering from pain that it is called a closure, and it is caused by a large, blunt object entering the foot; and these are cauterized in two ways, that is, with fire and with hot water.
But the cautery with fire is done by making the cauterizing instrument concave like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the closure on every side, and it should be of fine edges.
And then place that heated instrument on the closure, and then rotate your hand with the cauterizer around the circumference of the closure until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the closure. And leave it there for three days until it begins to sprout hairs. ↑ And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow and salt on the affected area, and leave the plaster there overnight, because this will help to remove the cause of the issue.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from fresh meat until it is healed.
And if the condition does not improve and more swellings appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with water to those areas. Take a tube made of bronze or iron or the feather of a vulture, and place it over the nail; then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water, and hold your hand steady, and rotate the tube with the pressure of your hand all around, and press the edge of the tube against the root of the nail, and the hot water will find its way to the root of the nail; let the patient endure the burning sensation for an hour, then remove it, because the nail along with its root will be removed.
And do this for all of them, until you have treated all those present on the body.
And then treat those pus that are rooted out by the action of ointments which make the flesh swell.
Chapter .43
On the Cautery for Tremors
When someone has tremors due to injury in the nerves or due to fever caused by similar reasons, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using olive oil as the cautery.
And their tremors will subside and hasten the healing of their illness.
Chapter .55
On the Cautery for Sudden Attacks on the Body
When the body is suddenly struck by boils and there are pustules or openings that are formed from thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning of their appearance, it is necessary for them to be cauterized over each opening with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, whose tip is extended with fire; or with a long surgical probe; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized immediately at the beginning of their eruption in this manner; and they are not feared, and the excess that causes them is dispersed, and one is healed from them.
"However, it is important that this be done after performing an evacuation with phlebotomy.
"Chapter 56.
"On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from Archer's Wounds.
"Archer's wounds are often accompanied by bleeding from the wound itself, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and in such cases it is difficult to stop the flow.
"So when this happens to someone, you must immediately clamp the wound with your hand at the entrance of the arrow, and press firmly on it until the blood flow stops under your finger, so that it does not escape.
"Then place the olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are red hot.
"Then take one of the cauteries, either small or large, according to the location and size of the wound where the artery has been severed. Quickly apply it to the vessel after removing your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the blood is burned and constricted.
"And if the blood continues to flow from the artery's opening when you remove your finger and take away the cautery, then take another one promptly from those prepared in the fire, and continue to do this repeatedly until the blood is constrained.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those [cases] using the usual methods, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four ways: either with a pointed cautery as we have said, or with extraction if it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the person are better burnt and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with thread or bandage with strong tension, or that medicines which have the virtue of restricting blood be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with moderate pressure.
But the one who administers moderate restriction with a bandage and strong tension with cloth or by changing the position of the causes of burning and similar [symptoms], should do so only later on.
But if this [method] is needed for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then use the aforementioned finger to occlude the orifice of that vein as we have said, and be aware that strong pressure should be applied to it until the blood is stopped from the main source of the wound, and the bandage should not be removed from the artery; and on top of the artery should be sprinkled with very cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened; and also be careful in case cautery or necessary medicine is needed.
Concerning incisions, perforations, fistulas, phlebotomy, wounds, and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illnesses for which it is appropriate to use a heated cautery and combustive medicines, as well as their causes and necessary instruments with the forms of the cauteries; I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the one seeking relief may find it on what he has asked about.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, my son, that you understand that what is in this chapter is similar to what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And because it requires great caution, since in the operation that is in this chapter there are many viewings and evacuations with blood, through which life exists, you must be careful of splashing the vein or making an incision over the abscess, opening a fistula, cleansing the wound, extracting an arrow, cutting out a stone, and similar procedures. And of all these is accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that upon you should not fall the thing in which there is doubt, because sometimes the case will happen to you with manners of men with very great sicknesses. And of them there is some who will go with their sickness and it will be easy for him to die, and this because of the intensity of what he finds in his sickness, and because of the length of his sickness, and with the sickness is fear which signifies death.
And among those is he who gives to you his wealth and property, while you expect health from him, but his sickness is harmful.
Therefore, it is not suitable that you agree to what comes to you from those of this manner; and your caution should be greater than your avarice; and do not assume any cause except with proven knowledge which verifies the thing for you, and upon which there follows praiseworthy succession.
And use in the care of all your sick people prophecy and diagnosis of he who is turned toward health, for in him you will have help toward gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not remove your direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the care of the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of that which you ask about and for which you need.
Chapter one.
About the care of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness very often happens to children at birth and when the nurse tightly swaddles the child's head without giving it enough space.
And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not understood.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those that I have seen it has always resulted in death, and thus it seems to me to be a difficult task to treat them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water had his head always swollen to the point that he could not lift it over himself because of the size of his head, and moreover the humidity increased until he died.
And this moisture is either added between the tendon and the bone, or it is added below the bone onto the cartilage.
Because if the operation is in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the latitude, and let the length of the slit be two nights so that it may drain the moisture, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore if the moisture has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from within and there is nothing hidden from you. You should cut into the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
Then extract all the moisture from the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and cotton; and then pour over it water mixed with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and bind the head firmly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and the patient dies from that bleeding along with the loss of fluid.
Chapter Two.
When there is cataracts or ruptures in the eyes or feet, and it is advanced, and medicines do not help, then the last resort for treatment in this case is the cutting of these two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary that when you want to cut those [arteries], the patient raises his head, and immediately washes the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthens the patient's neck with some cloth; and immediately considers where the vein throbs; and presses the places of each on the places near the ears, and they are hidden in some men.  (Translation may not be perfect as the original text is quite fragmented)
Then feel the artery with your thumb, and immediately cut each one with the blade of a sharp knife, the cut should go into the bone, and it should be done along the length of the neck.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and divide it into parts on top of it.
And let the length of the incision be twice the thickness of the skin, for when any vein is cut, the blood exits with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear immediately, then you should measure from the ear the amount of space of three fingers, and then probe with a probe, and find the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be drawn is approximately one-sixth of a measure, and it should not be taken from him more or less than this, and all this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of inflammation on the bone, then cut it open to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III
About the removal of the arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from an ancient or sudden acute migraine due to humid acrimonious qualities in the temples or from an ancient severe headache similar to those, and it is treated with medical cures but does not improve, then we have recourse to these extraction methods: extracting arrows from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
The method of operation and extraction is as follows: the patient shaves the hair from their temples; and the person performing the procedure should observe the prominent arrow in the temple, which has been shown to you by its pulsation, although it remains hidden in most people due to the severity of the cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arrow becomes clearly visible to you. And then you take the instrument, the shape of which is as follows: And then you peel the skin with it until you reach the arrow; and then pour oil on it and extract it piece by piece until you have removed it from the skin and discovered it completely from all its coverings.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of the onion, and then cut off a section of it according to the length by which its ends are extended and contracted. This will prevent blood flow, because if they are not cut, the blood will not rise completely.
Then evacuate the blood for one to three cups.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary for you to tie it in two places with double-strong silk or with long cords, and do not cut it until after the wound has healed, so that blood flow does not occur.
Then incise the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this at that time or soon after.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until its ends are incised, and this will serve as that same procedure.
And this is better done if the patient has a fever or is suffering from a hot condition, because cauterization helps to reduce dampness, and therefore it is better used in healing.
And it is also necessary for the extraction of the arteries that the place be well covered with cotton wool, and that appropriate powder be placed on it, and then it should be treated with dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and with compresses until it is healed.
And if while performing another task, blood flow from the wound occurs, then you should quickly restrict that blood flow, either with a pointed instrument or by filling the area with cotton, and press firmly until the bleeding is restricted. And if none of the above options are available to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood clots, and wash the area with very cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it firmly as needed.
And the easier method for removing a thorn from a wound is to cauterize the vein with this pointed instrument that has two prongs. After feeling both sides of the wound with your finger, place each prong on either side of the thorn, light them until they reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends is elongated, as it may not be completely solidified by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two prongs be equal. However, if the sharpness of the two prongs is less than that of two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, they may cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, heat from fire should be applied and the flesh should be slightly cut.
And this method is better than any other and easier as well.
And the space between two cottons should be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of bodies with acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head outside, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking, and their eyes are exhausted, so wet that even their eyelashes are limp, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient physicians used this operation for the treatment of such cases, and they named this treatment "spassa.
And you order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions in the forehead according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little less than the movement of the eyelids which are in the tear ducts, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp tips, for this is how its incision should be made: which is from the temples to the second incision. Scrape out all the membrane that is between the two incisions above the bone, and then do this from the middle incision to the second incision. Then press on this spatula and insert it again into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the given sentence:
Based on the context provided and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving blood and frozen parts of the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then place in each crack some old cloth, and place over those cracks powder mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and ensure that it does not become an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment of basilicon oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter .5
Of the care for tear ducts and descending ulcers from within the head.
When someone has acute and persistent catarrh, and sometimes their eyes are exhausted and small, and the regulation of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is severe pain in the front of the head with consequent drainage, then you should know from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh come only from the small veins of the interior parts.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, a little above the latitut (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right temple; let the incision be into the bone; keep your hand away from the temples' sutures which are tough due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence: And then immediately apply powdered dust mixed with oil and vinegar, so that an abscess does not form.
And when you release it and see that the abscess has diminished, then heat the bone until flesh begins to grow on it, and then treat it with a drying remedy that promotes the growth of flesh. For example, if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, make a plaster from this mixture and apply it to these wounds to promote the growth of new flesh.
Chapter VI.
About the care for those who have a cold in their ears.
All causes that affect the ears are of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass; or it comes from a plant, such as sesame seeds or beans; or it is a liquid cause, such as water and sour wine and their like; or some animal.
And therefore, when a stone or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear affects it, place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or cinnamon onto it, and then administer the extraction of it, make the person sneeze with condiments, and close the nostrils so that sneezing will not occur. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to its natural position above, because often it is dislocated with these causes.
And if it is not dislocated, then administer an extraction of the same with the instrument called "fine gesti epicicarios," which looks like this:
And if it is not dislocated with the instrument, then it is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine lancet of few doubles.
And if it is not dislocated with that, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. And then extract it with your own breath with strong suction, because often this is how it happens with what we have described.
But if it is not dislocated in this manner, then take some alum or some of the bird-lime used for catching birds, and place a small amount at the end of a reed, and then wrap around it a decent bandage. And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And so if it is not forgotten for all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut [the affected part] before it becomes an abscess or cramp.
And the way to cut that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein according to their strength and condition, then place a towel between your hands and tilt the ear towards the affected side, and make a small incision in the upper part of the ear where the grey matter is most prominent. And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the incision immediately, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause in the ear is one of those growths that grows and swells up, then administer treatment and removal of it; but if it does not obey your extraction, then take a subtle tweezers according to this manner: The text appears to describe a medieval medical procedure involving an ear abscess. Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
Sure, let's translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence into English: Translation:
Translation: And already the water has been poured in such a way that you take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt at its base.
And then put in another cotton and do this several times until all the water is drained out, and use a straw as was mentioned above about the extracting stone.
But in the case of a foreign object entering that ear, if it is a small object, similar to this one, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object which appears at the opening of the eardrum, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the cause of it will be lighter than all other causes that fall into the ear.
But in the case of removing a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not work, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if any cause of the worm appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine scissors, but if no cause appears, then take a straw that is thin at one end and wider at the other, for this is its form: Based on the provided context and similarity to medieval medical texts in Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is its shape. And make it of silver or iron, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
Therefore, let it be pushed so that it is in the cavity of the ear canal where it will be necessary to place the medicine. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end tightly in cotton. Then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the canal — which is in the ear —, then insert the reed with the cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And let what has been poured into the ear be already heated by fire for a short time. And take care that the substance you pour into the ear is not too cold, because the medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear impaction.
Based on the provided context and the similarities to medieval medical treatises in Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And that which happens in his chest, and which does not include the viscera, is in the most difficult conditions for healing.
And in that which you find the viscera, it is necessary that you place the patient's ear towards the sun and look into it. And if you see an obvious obstruction, open it with a fine spatula that matches its shape.
If the opening of it is small and one side of it is sharp while the other is not, then let the spatula be two finger widths long, so that it does not harm the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or its canal, then take that with fine scissors and cut it down vehemently until all the flesh has been removed.
And if the obstruction is in the depth of the ear, then take a thin reed and heat it with fire for a short time, and then insert that into the canal of the ear.
And if you sense an obstruction with water that the patient finds with ease, due to the heaviness of the ear, force out its pressure with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
Here is the translation of the given text:
If blood flows out, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the care for athelia which happens to the eyelids.
Athelia which occurs on the eyelids of the eyes is sometimes moist, and at other times it is dry.
Therefore, you should have those with honey or wax, and cut them with the blade from their roots, and then place them on the affected areas as described.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with a fine lenticular cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions and if it recurs many times when there remains some cause of its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes.
Often there is on the eyelids of the eyes some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
Here is the translation for the given text:
Based on the given text, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
If the wound is large, then you should stitch it closed; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is minor, then no harm will come to you because the salve of the wound will heal and close itself.
And if the ulcer is declining into the inner parts of the eyelid, you must examine the inner surface, so lift the eyelid and suspend the ulcer with a hook or something similar that you have on hand, and press it from all sides. And if the eyelid due to the ulcer has become elongated, this is of no concern whatsoever.
Then for the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the place with something that closes until it is healed.
Chapter X
On the care of the eyelid above the wound.
A cyst is a growth that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly occurs in children, making their eyes worse and causing them great discomfort; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are constantly coming to them.
And for this reason you see these children constantly making faces, even in their sleep; and thus the edges of their eyelids are always moist, which have already been covered with swelling, and the appearance of impending blindness is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness inside it.
Certainly! Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Based on the provided text and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation for your provided sentence:
"And be careful not to adjust in the opening, so that with the spatula you do not reach the scent and thereby cause a disturbance.
"But if it does not appear to you at first in the beginning of the opening, then adjust slightly into the opening for ease until it appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak rags in water with vinegar and place them over the area and hold them tightly.
"And thus some cover it with salt and place it in the cavity of the opening, so that what remains of its moisture.
"And then care for it until it is healed.
"But if a hot abscess occurs in that place, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
"Chapter XI
"On the ways of touching the nose.
"When under the eyelids of the nose, there are natural hairs that have been displaced and old, these irritate the nose and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids until it causes destruction of the nose, which is called touching of the nose. And it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as previously stated in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with canes as I will now say.
Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure involving the eye and eyelid. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Certainly! Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then open with the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, as in the case of a king's size.
Then place the scissors in one of the two corners of the hemorrhoid and cut it all away. Then adjust the two lips with silk or fine wool thread, clean the blood, and make what exceeds the threads adhere to two eyebrows with some viscous substance, if you wish to do so; otherwise, don't care.
Then remove the thread stitch after three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and cure it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted because of the closing of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better. And therefore, the ancients said this about healing. 😊
But nevertheless, be concerned for the patient and it is a good operation, and there should be no fear of it.
And there is another way to heal it, and that is to mark on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and joined needles in this form:
Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
And then carefully close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure what is within so that it may heal.
But if an abscess occurs, you should incise or make a fistula for it, and then cover that abscess with a patch and something similar to it, along with ointments.
And sometimes it is necessary for the eyelid to have its hairs removed. Then you should use what we said about incision on it, but stitches are more artful in each case.
Treating with canes follows this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have described; then by skill, make two canes or two fine sticks, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of the spatula. And you have already cut at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then add each one with finesse under the excess of the eyelid's skin, and tighten the canes of each section with a strong knot, and leave it for several days, because the string through the tightness will die and loosen until it falls off by itself.
If it's delayed, then use a saw with the tourniquet, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is swollen, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the way to make two reeds according to this form: and let there be the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter .12.
On raising prickly hairs on the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly on the eyes, then the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and place it in that thread of silk and linen, and then you adjust the extremities of it so that they are joined together in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be about the length of one palm.
Then you tie another fine thread underneath it in a short time, and knot the ends of that thread if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be near the sunlight so that your work is visible, because it is a subtle and small operation.
And then immediately insert the needle into the root of the eyelash that requires it, and make that penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural line of the eyelid.
And then pull the hair into the same place and insert that into the tweezers, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is removed from the eyelid together with the tweezers and the natural line of the eyelid.
But if the tweezers are pulled and the hair is not removed, you will pull the tweezers again from the sides with the thread that you have composed with it, until it comes out of the hole above.
And examine it with the eye vision, because when you remove the tweezers and the thread, and close each eye tightly, and leave the eyes closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is too short, then you take a long hair from the natural ones, and lift it with that, or leave it until it has lengthened somewhat, and then you lift that one.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment for cataracts that appear on the eyelid.
When cataracts appear in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upward, or to the right or left side due to improper healing from injury, cut, or cautery, it is called leporine cataract. This type of cataract can be either natural or accidental and is caused by poor healing from injuries, cuts, or cautery, or it may resemble other eye diseases.
The way to operate on it is to cut open that scar and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
And it is not necessary to treat the cause of leporine cataract with drying or restrictive measures, because if you do so, the cataract will return even worse than before.
Use for it causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and boil it with water in which althea and linseed are cooked, or ointment of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and soak the piece of cloth in it, and treat it with it.
"And the treasure of your care is that you pierce with all the skill that is not solidified according to the form from the beginning.
"And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a rectification of alchacra that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
"Chapter XIV
"About the care of alchacra which is made in the eyelid below.
"This alchacra which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called alchacra, can be either natural or accidental.
"But an accidental one is caused by a wound, cut, burn, or other similar things.
"And the way to perform the operation is to take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
"Then extend the flesh at the edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut it off with a wide spatula. "And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that's good; but if not, take a reed and place it on the split figure, and with that straighten the eyelid, making two slits in the lower edge of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at the two corners of the incision that you have made so that they converge, and let there be a triangle formed by their intersection when they come together.
And this figure is Greek in shape: Delta.
Then cut the flesh to the extent of the length of the pointed instrument below it, which should be the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; then treat them with the aforementioned softening medications and warm compresses until they are healed.
And if the eyelid needs to be incised by a cut or suture or cautery, then you must make an incision with a flat blade on the eyelid hair according to what has been stated before. Then separate it with warm compresses between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the treatment for drooping eyelids, whether it is above or below, let the operation be performed as prepared in the form of the eyelid, and this should be varied according to the shape of the eyelid.
And the wise artisans always prepare a tool in every possible way that can return the figure to its natural shape or near it, and this patient according to what is convenient for him in terms of the operation and the instruments in the best arrangement.
Capítulo XV.
"On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs to many people such that the eyelid is stuck above the eye, and its movement and natural functions are hindered, then you should insert the tip of a reed underneath the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with wax.
And then you should cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like incisions, but blunt a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And let your cutting be such that it easily separates that adhesion until the eyelid is restored to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it, or distill into it some dissolved juniper berries in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a little oil, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use consolidative plasters until it is healed.
Capítulo XVI. (Capitulo means Chapter in Spanish and Portuguese.)
On the incision of a nail and the protuberance of flesh from the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is in two ways, either it is nervy and similar to a fine brittle thing; or it is non-nervy, similar to congealed white moisture, which when iron touches it, either it must be taken with pincers, cut off, and the pincers are not inserted into it.
And both species begin only from the larger tear duct, entering little by little until it covers the sight and blocks the light and eye movement.
But the way to work in its incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then opens their eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, then collects the nail with pincers of little double thickness and extends it on the sides above. Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or cow's hair or bull's hair, or similar strong thread, double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; then extend it on both sides above, and remove the hair from the nail which is the pupil. "And thus you follow her with a needle into the back of him.
"And thus you incise the remaining part of the tear duct at its root with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear away the skin of the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur from that incision.
"And sometimes the nail with the sole of the finger or with a thread, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a fine spatula, which has this shape:
"And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
"Then place in the eye a little of crushed salt or powder made from dried sage, and leave it there until the next day; and then rinse it with water until it is healed.
"And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in that nail, then many times this type of nail is treated with medications and healed as we have described earlier in the division.
"And if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with sharp edges like this: It seems like you've shared an incomplete sentence from the medieval medical treatise. However, based on the context provided, I can make an educated guess that "am subtilitat" might be translated into English as "with subtlety." This interpretation is derived from the idea that the text is discussing delicate medical procedures requiring precision and care. If you provide more context or the full sentence, I could give a more accurate translation. Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
And then perform the operation on that area until everything is removed from it, except for a contrarian pustule that may be in the eye, because if you leave that area, and initially treat the pustule until it is healed.
And then continue your operation on that area with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the tear-bearing flesh, if it is noticeable in the eye due to great harm, should be hung with an ounce; and you should incise that from one side, but do not finish the incision so that you do not cause a flow of tears.
And then apply a poultice made of rosemary and sage to the tear duct until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the incision of the eyebrow and on that which is born from tight flesh in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is born and it is overgrown until it covers the pupil, or it presses closely against the eyelids and strongly squeezes the eyelids together at the outer edges, and it resembles a row of balusters.
But the operation on it is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then you open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, and take that with a forceps or tweezers; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to harm the eye during your operation.
And use your scalpel with which you incise those areas or with spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which ash is collected according to what will come later in this chapter.
Therefore, once your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with crushed salt or pour into it powdered roga similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outside a cloth dampened with egg white until an abscess is formed cautiously.
And if there remains any cause for concern and blood flows cautiously, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that area with water to promote the formation of pus. Then repeat the operation on it until it heals, similarly treating the adhered flesh that occurs in this type of wound.
However, you should avoid all care of the fresh wound by natural or accidental means, such as with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is capable of bearing that operation.
Chapter XVIII
"Of the collection of sap in the eye.
"The sap comes from the veins that are stretched over the eye and prevent the eyelids from functioning properly, causing the eyes to swell for days.
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sap is strong and there is no other illness in it besides the sap, then you collect that sap.
"And you should instruct the patient to place their head on your seat, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your judgment; and let that hook be of fine double thread in this manner:
"or if two hooks are used gradually on one body in this manner:
"And then those veins should be collected with fine forces, gently and carefully, and you should cleanse the blood gradually until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and are rolled up.
"And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are very steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
"And when you have finished, then you should drop clear or red vinegar into the eye so that with its sharpness it may dissolve whatever remains of the sap.
Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
And then proceed with the same manner until they are healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of hernias in the nose.
When you cure hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the preceding narrative and they do not heal, then do not cut into them but rather make incisions over the abscess until it is mature, and extract all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And thus when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
And it is named a sharp point, and should be made of iron, and its head should be round like this, which should be punctuated with fine points by filing or sharpening with subtle precision (as shown in the following figure).
Place that [instrument] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press with your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Here's the translation of the sentence you provided:
Here's my translation of the given text:
The text seems to be describing some sort of medical procedure involving a limb (possibly a leg or arm) and a stick. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then place that one on the bone, and let it be close to the tear duct; and slightly move your hand away from the eye, and then gently rotate your hand with the bone until it fully penetrates into the bone, and the patient will feel relief as a result of this action.
Therefore, at that time, restore the area with styptic medicines, drying it out just as you have been instructed.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, at that time the material that had been discharged from the openings returns to the nose, and thus it is easier on the patient.
Chapter 20
On the Reduction of Eyelid Swelling
When the eyelid swells completely and no harm or reduction occurs in the vision, it is necessary to let the patient rest, and then follow them, and then place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification for good suction; and then place a liniment on the eyelid that is made of acacia, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the eyelid with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take many linen cloths, and each cloth is folded into four layers; and make many of these.
"And then place one over the other according to the amount of help that is needed. "And then strengthen those with a hard cloth tied tightly; and use cupping glasses with suction without scarification; and then remove the cups and let the help remain tight day and night.
"But if during that time the ligament becomes softened, then it should be very tight.
"And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
"And if you see that the help has already been reduced, good; and if not, then apply the plaster again with the powders, tightness, and cups until it is healed.
Chapter 21
"About the inflammation of the iris of the eye.
"When there is a rupture in the iris of the eye, and it protrudes outwards through the eyelids like a grain of millet, and its shape resembles that of a man, if you want to incise this, then the operation on him is as we have recommended: you insert the needle into the root of the iris from below towards above, and then insert another needle from the side of the lacrimal, making it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the place of the double veil and lift with that the part of the iris around the needle, and strengthen this very much.
And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and let it sit until the thread is filled with pus.
And then treat the wound with water that comforts it until the injury is healed.
And sometimes cover the entire wound with a circular piece of cloth, then make an incision at the highest point of the wound with a thin probe that reaches to the bottom of the wound, allowing the moisture to drain, and then close the wound again immediately.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter .22
On the treatment of burns.
This illness called burns is nothing more than a condition that settles in the wound like descending water, but it is not.
But the way to deal with it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in your two hands from both sides and move it until you see the condition reaching the lower parts, and then dry it and prevent it from descending, and block the light, and let the patient see the causes as they saw.
And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Sure, let's translate the sentence into English step by step:
When she is fainted, then you should instill in the nose warm water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then she should be treated with the other causes until she is healed.
Chapter XXII
On the cure for water coming out of the nose.
As we said earlier, there are different types of water in the division, and which one should be pierced with an instrument depends on the patient's condition.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his nose so that it is tight.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his nose, if the water is in his left nostril; or with your right hand, if it is in his right nostril.
Then with your right hand take almonds, if the nose is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
Then place the tip of the almond near the edge of the nostril by the thickness of a reed in the inner corner of the eye, near the smallest tear duct, and then peel off the almond with strength and roll your hand with it.
And then immediately enter into the patient's room and verify that the bleeding has already occurred due to the treatment administered.
And let the measurement from the bleeding site to the pressure point be equal to the distance between the center of the pupil and the edge of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil the clarity of vision through the clear tunic of the cornea.
And then place the bleeding point in the spot where the water is, and then pull it down once, and then again another time, and if the water descends quickly, then you will see the patient as if his vision improves immediately, and bleeding in his eye.
And then wait for a moment; then if the water has descended, you should stop that other time before the bleeding stops.
And then when it is dry and no longer descends, you can remove the bleeding point with ease, and roll it gently between your hands, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in water and use that to wash inside the eye; and then place outside the eye a piece of cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and moisten the eye with this.
"However, we and those of our time use this remedy with an egg white mixture.
"But if your patient does not obey the instruction to drink the egg white mixture due to its harsh taste—for it is tough for some people—then you should take the ointment called alberith, of which this is the form:
"And so penetrate that joint with it, and do not remove your hand from the opening, lest you allow a subtle path for the humors.
"Then proceed to treat the patient as we have said.
"And you should complete the preparation of your work; let the patient's bedchamber be properly prepared so that he may sleep on his back in a darkened room, and all movements are forbidden.
"And place on him what will soothe his nature, and do not allow his head to turn to either side.
"And let the patient be treated according to their condition until the third day.
"Then release him into that darkened room and let his sight be refreshed; show him some objects, and then resume treatment until the seventh day.
"And it is not necessary to do this at the time of bleeding or immediately after purging. They need you to remove this because water can rise easily due to great and intense pressure.
However, if an abscess forms, it is necessary to loosen the skin in front of the seventh day, and treat it with water that will soften the abscess.
Then you should cover the face of the patient with a cloth and place it over his mouth so that his breathing is controlled for some days, keeping him in the darkest room.
And then gradually remove him from that room and return him to his normal surroundings.
And know that in the operating theater, the student is not exempt from certain views, and then you should be confident about the operation.
And now it has come to us from some of those who are in Arta, and one said that he made fire in the Magdalen Airac by making a hole with which water is drawn.
However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the types of Magdalen wells for which one should know about them if he does not know them:
And they are made of iron or properly of steel, and their ends have this subtlety: they are triangular, with the sharp end being the shape.
Chapter XXIV.
About the care for flesh cut on the nose.
When on the nose there are born various kinds of flesh growths, one of which is caused by a bite from a scorpion or a stinging fish; and this disease is called polyp because it resembles that fish. And if the flesh is cancerous or leprous and of a dark color, then it is not to be called "leon" but rather "carn.
Therefore, for the one who has these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous fleshy growths on his nose, you should have the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and pick at those growths with your fingernail. And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then cut off what you have grasped with a sharp, fine spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any part of it remains that can be excised, then scrape it off with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing remains. Certainly! Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
And then immediately place vinegar and water or wine into the nose. But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the palate, then you know that it has already been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swimming in the upper bones of the nose to which the opening has not reached.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into it, which has some thickness, and place nuts in it, and between each nut place the amount of a finger or hand, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the fat into the nose with a reed or with another suitable tool.
And after doing this, let it give off its fragrance until it reaches the passages of the nose, and is expelled from the throat, because many times children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for those who want to do it.
And then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and immediately apply a piece of meat with the nuts that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the meat is stuck to the nuts of the fat.
And then extract the bile, and place a clove in the nose near the blood vessel, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely corroded everything that is rotten in the flesh.
And then at the end of the process, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a dry treatment, use that one instead.
And this is the form of the tool used for nasal irrigation with which oils and medicines are instilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or iron, which should be similar to a small open lantern, also like a small basin, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the nasal irrigation tool should be flat and open; at the back of it there should be a handle with which you can hold it when you pour into it oil or water, or any juice that you want to suck.
The text seems to be in Old Occitan or possibly Old Provençal, which are medieval Romance languages closely related to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the sentence line by line:
From the tips are born in the extremities of the nose.
Many times a tip is born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and noted on certain days until it is removed from view.
And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that was in its place.
But if its removal is delayed until it has grown, then consider whether it is hardened, solid, of dark color and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a crancous abscess; for many times that which you remove this abscess does great harm to the one on whom it was.
And if the abscess is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and if removal is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and remove it without fear, and treat the area with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter .26.
Of the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is broken by wound or similar cause.
You should know that when there is a disruption in the continuity of one of these small cartilages, only a few people will benefit from this operation.
Therefore, when someone has any of these causes, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then take care that it heals from within.
And if the lips of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then it is necessary that you cut off each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out. Then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle some dragon's blood powder and trissat on top of them, and place a piece of fine emplastrum or one of the other consolidating emplasters on the powder, and leave it in place for two or three days, then remove it and replace the emplaster, leaving it until the threads are naturally dissolved, and then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
But the method of stitching is that you bring together the disruption in continuity either with needles as we have described in the stitching of the belly, or bring together the disruption in continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Chapter 27.
About the removal of that cause which occurs in the inner lips of the genital area.
Often observed in many men inside the lips of their genitals are hard growths resembling pork fat, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and folds where each of those hard growths is located, and then remove them by cutting them out until the bleeding stops. After that, wash the area with vinegar and treat it with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Chapter 28.
About the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
It is often seen that there is flesh attached to the gums which the ancients called "albulus". Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or forceps and incise it until it bleeds.
Then place on the area some powdered sage or other powders that have astringent or drying properties.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX
Concerning toothache with fever.
When the surfaces of both upper and lower teeth, as well as the spaces between them and the gums, are rough, dry, and sometimes blackened or yellowed until the gum becomes corrupt and the teeth loosen.
Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place their head on your lap, and scrape the teeth in which those rough areas appear with a tool resembling sand until no cause remains; this will remove the blackness and yellowing and other issues until they are cleaned.
If this does not cause the pain to stop as described at the beginning of the condition, then do so again on the next day and the second and third days until it reaches its final state as you wish.
And know that teeth require many different tools of various shapes and forms, depending on what is needed for your operation. And because the instrument with which the upper tooth is scraped differs from that with which it is scraped between the teeth according to other shapes, and you should prepare these forms of instruments as you will see shortly:
The sentence "Capitol .xxx." appears to be indicating a chapter or section number in the medieval medical treatise. This would typically mean Chapter 30. So the translation for this line is simply:
"About the removal of teeth.
"Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in all its removal, for there is no reason to replace it when it has been removed, for it is a sublime substance until its extraction.
"But when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must be firmly certain which one is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and it seems to be in a healthy tooth. And if you extract that one, then the pain will not cease until the sick and painful tooth has been extracted, because we have seen this happen through the work of barbers.
"Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it dissolves from the gum on all sides. And afterwards you treat that [area] with your words, or with fine forceps little by little at the beginning until you reach it.
"And afterwards, hold him firmly with strong hands for good speech or powerful traction, and place the patient's head between your knees so that he does not move, and then extract the tooth according to its right direction in such a way that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that all parts are moved with ease and strength, as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is cracked or rotten, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with a thin thread so that it will not break during your pulling with the forceps.
And it is necessary that you work meticulously with scraping around the entire circumference of the gum and be careful not to break the tooth so that it remains intact, and return to the patient because the pain will be greater than before.
And beware not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their arrogance and audacity regarding the removal of teeth without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring great troubles upon sick men that are more difficult to heal, and the reasons for this are all, or some of them, or because you extract that tooth along with some bones from the jaw as well, just as we have testified on many occasions.
And before removing it, the mouth should be washed with warm water or vinegar and salt.
If there is bleeding through the wound, as if it were many small vessels, then sprinkle some amount of dry powder on the wound and, if the powder does not help, use a cautery.
The shape of the forceps and thin tongs with which you begin to extract the tooth should be long at the end, short in handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to work with them.
And thus the handles should be of such a size that when they are tightened with these, they are not bent, and they should be short at the end.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the end, and on the ends of these there should be teeth, some of which go into others and tightly constrain by force, and sometimes the ends of these are in the shape of a stork's beak, which is wide, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from fractured jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured, you should place a cotton cloth with a border over the area for one or two days until the area becomes soft; then insert tongs or tweezers, the ends of which resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or heron, in the shape of forceps:
Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation of the given sentence:
And if the patient does not comply with your instructions using these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary for you to cut into the flesh and expose all the meat, and insert the instrument which is called "atali", that is, a small lever, whose form is this:
And let it have a tip that is slightly thick, and not be bent so that it does not become stuck.
Therefore, if the flesh is thus penetrated, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is that of a triangular tip in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument should be more subtle at the tip.
And having already helped with these instruments, which have two ramps, their form is approximately as follows: And with other instruments which will be used for dental scraping; because this has been done with an instrument that resembles a large needle, and this is its shape:
With a twisted or short triangular tip that has some thickness, and not bent, so that it does not become stuck.
And know that the tooth extraction instruments are similar to and resemble other instruments.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
And if there is any swelling in the patient, gradually reduce it and hold it with your mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone of the whole area is removed; then restore the area with suitable medicine for this purpose.
And if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape away that hole and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 32
Of the care for prominent teeth over others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural shape, which can be ugly, especially when this happens to women, and more so to venerable young girls; then you should consider: if the tooth is nothing more than another tooth, and it is impossible to extract or trim it, then remove that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which looks like a pig's snout, and is made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip.
And make your cut with the instrument you will use to cut it over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is affected.
Here's the translation for the given line:
And let it all be made of Indian iron; and the points should be very small, like those used to make needles, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is affected or injured. And then bind it in the end, and rinse it with alkaline solutions.
And if it is a tooth from which a piece has broken off and the tongue touches it, then you should file that part until the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When it happens that the front teeth are dislodged or displaced by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew, and you have treated him with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then in order for them not to decay, fill those strong ones with gold filling and not silver, because silver turns black and decays quickly after a few days, but gold never changes.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence: And then gently return the tissue into the opening from which it began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill until it is not displaced.
And with the bandage you have used to reinforce the wound, you should clean the teeth so that they do not become infected.
And then cut the ends of the excess bandage with scissors or tweezers, and add those to each place with skill, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then leave it thus bound tightly like this.
But if it becomes loose or torn, strengthen that or those with another bandage in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed teeth, as you see these bound together.
And when it is done that one or two teeth return to their place, and they are sewn as we have described, and that they remain.
And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use some cow bone for this purpose, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, and they are placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and they remain and serve with that for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
From the beginning of the complaint that affects the tongue, and prohibit speaking.
This complaint that appears under the tongue sometimes is either natural and present from birth or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head tilted back; raise his tongue, and then cut that nerve-filled complaint according to its length until the tongue is released from its tension.
However, if there is any hardness or knotting, and this has happened due to the healing of a wound, then apply oil and cut it lengthwise until you have cut through the complaint and the knot has been dissolved.
And be careful not to make a slit in the surface of the flesh, and that you cut only the tendon and cause blood flow. ↑ Back to top
Then wash the traces of the incision with vinegar or warm water, and place under the tongue a soft cloth; this is what will hold the patient's tongue under the tongue every night so that it does not stiffen again.
"But if there is a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the area; but if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with an ancient cautery that is suitable for this purpose. "And treat the patient with other remedies until they are healed.
Chapter 35.
"On the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
"Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small bladder, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and soon it swells greatly until it fills the mouth.
"The operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and observe the abscess.
"And if you see that it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel pain in it, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
"And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert a lance into it, and you cut that with a fine spatula, and you divide it from all sides; and if blood flows during your operation, then you place powdered sulfur, which is vitriol, on top until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your task until you have completed it, until he is washed with vinegar and salt; and care for him with the other treatment so that he may be healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the removal of abscesses from both ears, and on those that grow in the throat, and on other abscesses.
When there is an abscess in the throat, they are glands that resemble cotton, which come out from inside and are called two ears; when you treat them with the water we have mentioned in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, do not touch that one with iron.  (In other words, if the abscess has these characteristics, do not use a cautery on it.)
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with iron because of the blood flow; rather let it be until it ripens, and then either you will pierce it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, reddish, and its root is fine, then that one is the type that needs to be incised.
And the operation on him is that you should first consider before your operation if the abscess has been properly drained or if it has decreased somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and a servant holding between his hands should press the tongue of the patient down with an instrument of noble design like this:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife blade.
So when you press with it on the tongue and see the abscess, catch it with your thumb and index finger, then take a knife and place its edge under it, and pull it outwards as much as you can. Another thing that may be pulled out some of the membranes, then cut it with an instrument like this:
Another thing that may be pulled out some of the membranes, then cut it with an instrument like this: and it resembles forceps, but the tips of them are curved in such a way that the opening of one is facing the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron that has been quenched.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel that looks like this: and let one side be sharp, while the other side is dull.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other in the same manner of incision. Then let the patient heal from cold water.
But if there is bleeding, let the patient heal with water boiled with pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves and similar to that, stiptic substances, until the blood flow stops, and then care for him until he is cured.
And sometimes this appears as boils or abscesses or both ears, and incise them just as I have said about the incision of two wounds.
And I have treated a woman with an abscess that was formed on her throat, which was dark in color and nearly insensible, having already closed her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and I had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she would have died if it had lasted for one day or two more.
And the abscess had grown so much that it was pushing out through two passages.
Therefore, I made an incision and placed one of them in one of the openings, and pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it. And then I incised that which was understood from the other opening, and then I held her mouth open, and pressed her tongue down, and then I placed the instrument in that abscess.
And you should cut away a large part of him, and there should be only a little blood coming out from him. Therefore it is certain that the woman's gallbladder has been removed, and she should begin drinking water immediately, and then take food afterwards. I did not stop cutting out parts of that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess developed in its place, which I cut open until it extended to that point.
Therefore I cauterized and burned the gallbladder of him, because of this addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God did with that afterwards near me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
About the cutting of an umbilical hernia when it becomes inflamed.
When the catarrh descends to the navel and it is inflamed and long, then it is named a perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part and is large and round, then it is called a buba.
But when it is healed with the water we mentioned earlier, and you do not complete your treatment, and likewise if you have already cut out an abscess that was thin, then you should cut off what is attached and round; and if it is of this length, and it is bleeding, dark red or black in color, and it does not heal, then you should attempt to cut it out, because there is danger for the patient.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary that you do not ask him about that, but only what is related to the natural course of events without addition, because if you ask him more than that, you will disturb his speech.
And for the questioning, use what we have recommended for the questioning of two melons, and take care to do so until it is healed.
But if the patient is afraid of being questioned, it is necessary to use cunning in their cauterization without fear. The manner of the cautery on them is only with sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient on your lap, then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then take some of the water that has been described in the chapter on cauterization, and perform with it a living cause. Place this neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Let the opening of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the lower lip of the patient, who should then bite down on their tongue so that saliva or mucus from their mouth flows out due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of it goes down their throat and they are not harmed by it.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for the space of a half-hour until you see it become blackened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of the ray (penis), and submerge the cotton in medicine, then insert the penis with the cotton into a glass or tube until the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times as necessary to achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the uvula. Then leave it alone so that it will dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, repeat it. Then, after cauterization, clean the surrounding area of the uvula with cotton dipped in wine vinegar, and rinse it with the liquid that is around it from the medicine. After washing with cold water, treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with gargles until it heals.
And this type of treatment is more effective and longer-lasting.
Sometimes the uvula is healed with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it can be cured by sublimation in this manner: Take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, dried grapes, chamomile, savory, and similar herbs. Mix all these or some of them in a pot, soak them in vinegar, and let them boil; the pot should be well-sealed with clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be an opening, over which you place a concave instrument made of silver or iron in this manner.
Here's my best guess at translating the given text into English:
And then repeat the treatment on those parts until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, because it would constrict the abscess too much, and you should not do this unless you have obtained the permission of the patient's physician.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg to its end, so that the patient's mouth may be protected, because the shell of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the removal of splinters and of water that adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Various things adhere in the throat or a thorn from fish or some other cause.
Then it is necessary that you extract the water that is apparent from these things, which you see when you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause attached to the throat is expelled by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of onion or a lettuce root or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of marine sponge, moisten it well with honey, and then have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are splinters, they will be expelled. And moreover, take an eel and have it bound in a towel, and place it inside the tablecloth, and afterward extract it; or take a leek and place it under the tablecloth, and afterward remove it.
And if you do not remember those reasons which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a cavity which you insert into his mouth easily.
And let him keep his head raised upwards, and be careful that the touch of his throat bone does not cause damage to his body or dislodge a bone or spine, or that which the physician does with his hand.
But however, it is better that the patient who inserts this does so skillfully, due to his knowledge of the place and cause attached, and pushes downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount which has been prepared inside until it is removed.
Chapter .39.
On the Extraction of Bloodsucking Insects Attached to the Throat.
When a bloodsucking insect is treated with the water which we mentioned in the division of treatments without surgery, consider then in the throat of the patient carefully, after you have pushed down his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
If you see a leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers gently.
If you cannot extract it in this way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the throat) and abstain the patient from water for the entire day. ⇔ If you cannot extract [the leech] in this manner, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and repeat this process until the leech is dead and removed from the throat. Ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
Then take a bowl full of cold water and place the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, but spit out the water after an hour or so using your hand, for as soon as the leech feels the water, it will release.
However, if it is not removed with the water we mentioned, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Based on the pattern of the given text, here's a line-by-line translation for "Fay aquo, so en quar cayra":
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if [the cautery] is not done, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eating salty and cold foods, and they should not drink water. It is necessary that with this treatment, the [condition] should be forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting from the vein is practiced when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see them, except that there are some curves in it. which is placed on the vein, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, in which a file is sharpened, so that when you compress any cause, it does not slip.
Chapter .40
In which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, as is remembered about them, each of which is described in this book.
And they are different in their perforation and incision by two ways, one of which is according to the type of abscess itself; and because of what we understand from the humors.
And the second manner is specific to the places where the affliction occurs in the body, for the abscess that appears on the head is different from the abscess that appears on the buttocks; and the abscess that appears in a fleshy area is different from the abscess that appears in a joint; and each of these has its own treatment based on their location.
And moreover, there are certain abscesses that should not be pierced until the pus within them has matured or reached its completion.
Other abscesses should be lanced when they are new and not yet matured according to their natural course, such as those that appear near the joints. For an abscess appearing near a joint prolongs its existence until it can spread to the surrounding area, and quickly the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, leading to contraction of that limb. Or if the abscess is near a main member, delaying the piercing until the pus has matured can cause damage to the main member; or if it is near the buttocks, then pierce it even when not yet matured, but do not pierce it while still immature and improperly digested, except for those near the buttocks, so that the pus cannot spread further inside the buttocks and create a fistula, or cause an incurable condition. "But you should know the time for the incision of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
"And know that it is matured when there is relief from pain and fever, as well as a decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and the head of the abscess becomes more pointed, along with other signs.
"And you should know that the incision should be made in the lowest part of the abscess, and from this comes the cure of the prominence.
"And the incision should always be along the length of the skin or body, if the abscesses are in the places of hands or feet, and in the areas of wrists, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all parts except those in which there is reflection; because in those that are reflected, use incision according to that member.
"But when the abscess is in a fleshy part, it is better to leave the incision until its digestion has been confirmed according to our previous instructions; because if you incise before that, the body of the pus and much filth will be prolonged, and it will easily open the lips of it and increase its depth.
This text appears to be discussing the treatment of certain conditions involving swellings or abscesses (apostemas). Here's a line-by-line translation:
"And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and for large abscesses, a large and wide incision or multiple shallow cuts according to the size of the abscess.
"And there are other types of abscesses where the blade should be concave and incised, when done so that it is as wide as a slice of bread, this is usually done in cases of double boils and buboes.
"And of those that are incised with a section having three angles, and among these is the one in which it is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the inguinal region.
"And there are those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, similar to the ones mentioned above.
"But in cases where it is not like the abscesses of leprosy, which are superficial, you should puncture them with a shallow or flat puncture only.
"And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should puncture it, but be careful not to draw out all the pus at once; having extracted a part of it, then bandage the abscess back up until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and repeat this process gradually until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in decline, because their vital spirit often dissolves with the expulsion of blood, and it is quite possible that the patient will die, and you open them.
Be cautious when approaching this chapter, and ensure that your puncture in the area you are treating is clean. Consider whether the wound from the abscess is small or a flat cut. If it is small, you should administer ointments of lily or cota antica. If the abscess is large and the openings are many, then place cotton wool in each opening until they all meet together.
And if in the abscess there is a part that has been cut off or hollowed out, then you should fill it with old cotton or cloth made into strips, as when you have crushed bread or radishes, without moisture; and strengthen it for three days; and then proceed to cauterize and treat it with water suitable for ointments until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place it on the site of the bleeding many times.
If the flow of blood persists, then you should administer a regimen and treatment with the powders that are recommended in many places in this book and its divisions.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil on them, and do this until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to it the treatment that is suitable for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated specifically by its own chapter.
Chapter 41.
On the cutting of abscesses that occur in the back of the head.
In the back of the head, small abscesses form, and these are like certain types of knots that contain thin skins on their surface; and the type of these is many.
And their blisters are formed, and from those that contain moisture similar to lime. And of these are the ones that contain moisture similar to dust, and resemble them; and of these are those that are stony, hard.
And in the cutting of all [of these], and in their removal there is no fear, because the extraction of them does not cause any contrary effect.
And the operation in cutting them is that you probe them with an instrument the shape of which appears as follows, which is called entromes, [you should] know beforehand what it contains.
Because if that which it contains is moisture, then you should cut it with a section according to the length by surface section as follows:
And begin the section at the line of .B. up to the line of .G. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, you should excise that which contains that moisture, and leave no part of it at all, because if there remains any part, the swelling will return.
And then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it for another day, because with water you will corrode everything that remains of that scab.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment on that swelling repeatedly and diligently if needed, until you are sure there is no further cause for concern about that membrane; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains hard nodes, then you should cut it in this manner: with a section shaped like a cross, and place the scissors between two lips of the section and cut it out completely from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if you encounter resistance with your scissors, then do what I previously told you.
Similarly, do the same for the hardened abscess in terms of sectioning and care as we have told you; and sectioning over a hardened abscess is easier because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses in the head of some people with whom there is absolutely no moisture; this is because I once cut open an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be crushed, and if anyone were struck by it, they would suffer.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And cover the hole of those from the lower part, so that the body is relieved of illness in the lower parts.
And then treat them with water appropriate for treatment.
Chapter .42.
Of the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Often these abscesses appear in the neck and in the armpits and groin area, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And so those that occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, as we have said regarding the nodes and abscesses of the head.
And the species of these scrofula are many, because some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the touch, whose visible color is close to the color of the liver, and which is spread throughout, and which is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and which is not prominent, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial incision from above to below the body along the line of G. between the line of B., and clean it entirely, and draw two lips of the liver with an ounce, or with many ounces if you need them, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve is not severed.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut into your hand, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you should cut a vein or artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then place on the wound vitriol trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and compress the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the aposteme subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood has been cut.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with the patient's tongue if there is any other cause of the other small pustules, so cut and clean those as well.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is better not to cut that pustule from its roots. Rather, it is better to lay that [pustule] with a strong double poultice and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm. ️
And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out the entire tumor, then you must join together the two lips of the wound and sew it shut immediately so that no excess remains.
But if you see that there is still excess due to the size of the tumor, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut out the root of it, and then extract it and administer a stitch as mentioned before.
And those tumors that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial incision where you see the mature part, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below, as we have said.
And then administer the piercing with needles and similar ointments, so that it dissolves what remains of the corruption. And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the incision of the pus-filled boil occurring in the groin.
The translation for the given text is as follows:
And this is the prescription for those people.
But in men having scrotal swelling, the removal of the testicle should be avoided, because it does not help if done by water, since all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are here.
But in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, it is necessary to use the section of the testicle to prevent the loss which is caused by gangrene.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the testicle below three circles of the testicular circles, or four with a small section through the length between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in the scrotum, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
And if the physician is faint-hearted, then he should extend the throat with an ounce of oil, and then split the throat until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of them as a result.
Then cut the clitoris in the same way as we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which comes out of that orifice with water, which is disrupted by it and by the absence of voice. ‍♂️
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time of the feared perforation has passed, add two lips from the edge of the wound and stitch it up alone without a bandage.
Then administer medicines that promote tissue growth until it is healed.
And Ibn al-Baitar says that the summary of what we have discussed is nothing but a demonstration that some of these apostems have already taken the life of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his soul has dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the site of the wound for some breath, and he is saved from death.
And for this reason, I order that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to stitch up the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And this that I have seen with my own eyes is that a maid took a knife and stabbed herself in the neck, and cut off a piece of the lung's trachea, and I was called to her care, and found her in the state as it is found in the dead, and discovered the wound and found the blood coming from the wound was little.
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that. Here is my best guess at a line-by-line translation into English:
And do not speak to the servant unless you have recovered your voice, and then after a few days return to improving their conditions.
And now I say that in the section on headache there is nothing to fear.
Chapter .44.
On the section about an abscess which occurs on the neck outside and is called a hernia of the neck.
This abscess named hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's color and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
In the natural case, it is not worth curing.
The accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles large nodes, and the other resembles an abscess caused by a knotting of the artery, and in that case there is danger. And one should not make assumptions about it with iron as long as it is small. And you should approach that and investigate it as said, and if you find it resembling large nodes and not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like nodes, and extract it with water in which linen and purslane are boiled; but if not, then you must thoroughly examine all its being, and afterwards cure the area with healing water until it is healed.
"Chapter 45.
"On the cutting of various types of knots.
"There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
"And it is appropriate that I explain the difference between a knot and a tangle, since there may be doubt about this.
"I say that in a tangle there is heat and fever and intense pain until the overflow of the excess is settled; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat then cease.
"But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I tell you about that cipher leon which is proper to the sac.
"And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it is made as such: whether larger or smaller, there are two types, because they are either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
"Therefore, when you come to the treatment of knots, you should examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called an intromes, as will be shown in the following chapter.
And it is thus the method of inquiry for abscesses and all knots: you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part that you find in the abscess, and you turn your said instruments little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
And then finish your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the instrument and observe what has come out in its place.
And if the running humidity has come out, of whatever color it may be, then you cut it with a superficial incision as I have said for other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity in the place of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
And dry it with a scissors cut in the shape of a cross like this: as you have been taught, and suspend it with hooks, and peel the cord from every side with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, on that, and extract that corruption with the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens, and then you must extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
Because if any cause remains from him, a little or too much, the need returns according to the seasons.
And if you see that there is any small part remaining from him, then complete the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders and strengthen the wound; place a hot cautery on it to cause an abscess, and treat it with other treatments until he is cured.
And if the growth is large, then you should sew together both of his lips and treat it with a salve that heals flesh.
However, if the pulsatile vein is opposite it or non-pulsatile, then you should cauterize and fill the area with vitriol powder that has been dried three times; let it sit for two or three days until the wound softens and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cut away what remains of the growth.
Chapter 46.
About the shapes of the instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
These are the shapes of the instruments, which come in three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
The shape of the large instrument is as follows:
The way to enter the child is like this:
They are made of iron, of alum, of burnt excrements, properly mixed so that they facilitate the entry into the anus.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called plasters, and one of those is called birch.
And it consists of three species, because from them come large, medium, and small.
The form of the great experience is as follows:
The form of the medium experience is like this:
The form of the small experience is as follows:
It is fitting that they be used for those anuses, exits, fistulas and buboes, because among them are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, large, lion-shaped, as well as like large needles with which the saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wax or of beeswax or iron, or silver, and the best are when they are made of citrus wax.
And the experiences are made with black feathers, which are arranged in such a way that the fistulas are opened in their cavities where they are reflected, so that they are reflected by their lightness with those reflections.
And it is of three sizes, for some of them are long, and others medium-sized, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Shape of a large lead probe:
Shape of a medium-sized lead probe:
Shape of a small lead probe.
The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple and have only one curve, and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium-sized.
And there are also hollow hooks, which also come in three sizes.
And some of those hooks have two curves and they also come in three sizes.
And there are also those with three curves, which also come in three sizes.
And all these are necessary for their respective purposes.
Shape of a small simple hook, its shape:
Shape of a large hook with two curves: It seems like this text is discussing the form or shape of a medical instrument or tool. Let's break it down line by line: This line means: "There are two types of cupping techniques:
This line means: "For large cupping, there are three variations:
This line means: "For medium-sized cupping, there are also three variations:
This line means: "And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they come in three sizes, namely large, medium, and small.
This line means: "Shape of a large scalpel:
This line means: "Shape of the medium-sized scalpel:
This line means: "Shape of a small scalpel:
This line means: "The tips of these [scalpels] with which the incision is made are sharp, while the other tips are not sharp. They are not positioned in such a way that it might cause injury to a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes, so that the patient may be healed and find some relief from the heat caused by the scraping of the abscess.
This line means: "And these are the forms of cupping glasses, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
And it is in the left limb that has been punctured with a hidden spatula, and in that [limb] runs towards the separated parts inside and outside, when you want, thus as needed.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned fingers for the perforation of abscesses and which patients do not perceive, come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those [spatulas].
The forms of bloodletting cups used to cut off the flow of blood are of three types: large, medium, and small.
They should be made of copper, round with some length, and they should be thin.
And these are the types of bloodletting cups you should have: large, medium, and small, so that through them you can cut off the flow of blood quickly when necessary, and initially it is not medicine.
However, do not use them to cut off blood from any part of the body, but only from fleshy places, such as on the thighs and hips, and on the arms, breasts, belly, and knees, and similar to their fleshiness.
And sometimes these instruments are made of other small shapes resembling fisac scorsas according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy or a necessary incision of the vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII
Of the care of male breasts, which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they start to get fat, and then the breasts also swell, resembling women's breasts, and they are quite visible, hairy.
And to those who have this, it is necessary to cut with a lunar section in the following manner: from line B to line G, and then excise all the fatty tissue, and then fill the wound with emplastrum medicamentosum, and then suture the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed.
But if the breast inclines to the sides and softens with its size as is fitting for women, then it should be divided into two parts above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which is contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you did not cauterize the wound that needs to be cauterized due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment has dissolved all the fat, and then treat the area that has been healed.
Chapter XLVIII
About the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the type of scrofula, hard, and contain a stone that is pus.
And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you fill it with old cotton and leave it for another day.
And then the cotton should be removed and the area treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type of nodes or scrofula, then you should incise it in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
If the wound is spread to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then administer to them cautery as we mentioned earlier.
Chapter 49
Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
When an arrow is broken and the cord that was on it is consolidated, then numerous abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an arrow, it is extended lengthwise in the body; and when you press upon the abscess with these fingers, you feel in him a wheezing.
And that which is from a vein is round to the appearance of the body.
An incision on this abscess is an error, especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
But on that which occurs due to inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, cut in the long incision in the cord; and then widen the incision with hooks near the arrow, and deliver from the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place a needle on that and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the bowstring with double thread in two places — which is what I have seen in the extraction of two arrowheads from Templars.
And then press on the area between the ligaments with a spatula until all the blood comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment on the wound until the ligaments fall back into place; and then treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you should have water close to the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in it until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess tightly with a good ligature as I have told you before in the case of the grape-sized abscess with two parts at both ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle through all of the abscess from the entry point of the first needle, and tighten these threads in four places.
This sentence appears to be discussing the treatment of an abscess (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then place on the wound the cloth which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment that is made with cloves and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of the nerves.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and in the vein, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or due to excessive work, and by similar causes.
And it most commonly occurs in the places of the ankles or the sole, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is most commonly found in those who are weakened and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient feels a similar numbness.
And it is not an abscess that grows on the front of the body, and for this reason it leaves the spine, and it hurts in all parts and does not go to the parts before or behind.
Therefore, those that are on the joints should not be bound with iron, because very soon it will cause constriction.
"But those that are in the head or in the forehead use a spatula. "But if the abscess is small, then cut it with scissors and remove it by its roots.
"And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and excise it, and immediately remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
"Chapter I
"On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the chest or in the belly.
"It happens to many men observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungus due to their similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and now their lips have turned outward, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very magnified.
"And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two of those which were more similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between the white ones, of small roots.
"And now their lips were turned outward and split open, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Therefore, I cut them open and found that one had eighteen points and the other six points.
And the operation in their cutting is such that you should consider whether the patient is moist and the tissue is white and moist of fine texture; then cut with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready in the fire, for many times you must remove much blood from them; and if you see blood, cauterize it.
And if the patient is weak and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; instead take freshly made lead paste and apply it to that tissue, in the manner we have described; and leave it there for two days.
And then tighten the lead thread in the wound; so, do not stop reinforcing the lead greatly on the tissue until it is cut and falls out by itself without effort.
But if the tissue is of large size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its cutting, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible to cut most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure that within so that the wound may be healed.
And be careful not to cut into that which is dark in color, with little feeling, and slow healing, for that is also cancerous.
And I will come back to remember this crab [a type of tumor or growth] shortly.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of a swelling of the navel.
A swelling of the navel is caused by several things: either by a tear in the peritoneum which lies over the belly, and from it comes out intestine or hernia as happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by wind constricted within it.
However, if it is due to a tear in the peritoneum and the protrusion of intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it is soft without pain, and appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its position is more varied and stronger than that which we have mentioned, and when you press on it with your fingers, it is hidden, and then returns; and it is lighter with hot baths and strong labor.
Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line into English:
And if it is due to blood, then use these signs to appear the aposteme in black decline.
But if it is due to flesh, then the aposteme will be severe, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it feels hot.
And the operation on it is that you should consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence; then you must refrain from treating it, because in this there is fear and danger, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about apostemas from an artery and from a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to intestines or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their breath and remain still; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and then command them to stay between your hands on their abdomen, and then surround it with a wide spatula around the navel over the spot that you have signed with your finger; and then extend most of the aposteme towards the top with a large hook; and then tie it in a circle with strong thread or silk and bind it according to the proper manner.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
And if you have found the tissue, then take it with a hook; and incise the excess parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your bow or vein, then surround that spot and return to your task; take two needles and put in them two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the stretched flesh may shrink and fall by itself; or incise it when it is softened and has shrunk, and then cure it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is neither flesh nor fluid, then you should draw out the abscess as we have said, and extract the blood or fluid that you find in it, and then cure it with water that heals and solidifies the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
As we have said in the division, of the types of cancer and how to approach its treatment with medicines, and that it is avoided by treatment with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken of cancer developed in the mother and of the care required for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes it is possible to remove it from the place where it is, such as with cancer located in the breasts or hips and resembling the limbs, to remove all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, it is not worth approaching it, for I have not seen anyone cured of this, nor has it come to my attention that such a cure exists.
And the operation on it is as we have said, that you proceed and leave the patient and purge him of black bile several times, and then bleed him if there is found an obvious swelling.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and then prohibit him from eating anything that is necessary for this; and then make sure to evacuate completely with good purgatives until there is no longer any cause of its return. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the area, and wash away all the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument with which you can among the instruments.
But if there is a problem with the thick blood being issued from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
**Capítulo 4.**
On the care of those with dropsy.
We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of dropsy from water, and the symptoms of each type, as well as their treatment with medicine.
And that which is treated with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be treated with iron for tympanites or for the condition of edema, because that is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and your treatment has not worked, then consider that if the patient is weakened by another illness or by another type of dropsy, such as coughing or abdominal pain similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, because there is danger in this.
However, if you see that the patient is full of vigor and has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is neither child nor old, then the way to operate on them is for you to lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him by pressing his abdomen with your hand, drawing out the water from below the navel, and then take a thorny spatula like this:
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you with the section be next to the navel by three fingers' width to the right on the patient's lower abdomen.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the left side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side where the patient wants to be treated, so that the excess does not flow into that cold place.
And then pierce with the instrument all along the bowel, and then introduce it into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the bowel and the liver, and you will draw that out; and if the amount is of one fingernail or around it.
And then pierce the liver until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is located. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of this form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is sharpened like a quill pen, as you see.
Based on the given pattern of translation and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's translate the sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then remove the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes it, which is as soon as it is retained by the cord that pulls on the tube above the container from which I have instructed you to pierce it in that manner.
And then repeat the process with the instrument on another day if you see that the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, and be careful not to leave any water remaining.
But if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then cure him by burying [him] in hot sand, moving [him] under cold baths, and exposing [him] to the sun for a long time; and treat [him] with desiccating medicines until he is cured.
And cauterize the stomach and the spleen near the water extraction site, as I have previously described in this treatise.
Chapter .50
About the care of infants whose urinary openings are not perforated.
Sometimes, one of the infants comes out of his mother's womb and his urinary passage is not open (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to cut with perforation as soon as it appears, using a very fine spatula in this manner.
And then place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it, and keep it there for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing over this hole will not be able to escape.
However, that whose hole is narrow should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
However, those in which the hole is not in its proper place are called fistulas, and the reason for this is that from them, the one that is born is at the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate straight ahead, until he raises his penis with his hand above; and it is not a generative organ, because semen cannot reach the mother directly, and it is a very bad condition.
The method of operation on him is for the patient to be placed on his back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with great force, and cut off the head of the penis from the foreskin with a sharp spatula, just like plucking a feather, so that the middle part comes out similar to the head of the penis and the hole falls into the middle as it should.
And be careful in your operation to control blood flow, because many times this happens; and hold the patient with something that stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
Of the whitlow that occurs in the foreskin at the tip of the penis, and of the corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
This whitlow occurs frequently in the penis and is a protuberance of soft flesh.
And of these, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant: you should suspend it with a subtle hook and cut it until it is completely removed; then place on it a cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; and then treat it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.
And if the whitlow is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply cautery near its root and base.
But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part of the whitlow that is inside at the beginning until it is solidified; and then you treat the outside part, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not shrink. ️
The text you've provided appears to be discussing a medical condition affecting the genitals and foreskin. Here’s a line-by-line translation:
And then treat him with the other treatment until he is healthy.
But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
for the cautery to be beneficial, it must address both conditions at once, namely the flow of blood and the corruption of the wound.
And if the tip of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the tip of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those who have an intact foreskin, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when it happens due to a wound or an abscess) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the band is dissolved and the tip of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should scrape some of the skin from the tip of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, being thin, is easily torn due to its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which has already been soaked in cold water to prevent it from sticking again.
And then treat it with six stitches until it is healed.
Chapter .57
About the cleansing of infants and the care of those who have had circumcision.
Circumcision is not like other diseases: but because it is performed by our hand and will, especially on infants, it is necessary that we assign the best method and easiest way for them to recover their health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. And it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a razor and towels; and they use bandages with honey and incisions with the nail.
And I have tried all these methods and found none better than using scissors for cleansing, along with bandages of honey as in the case of using the nail, because many times the skin comes off above, because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is very thin and likely to cause another incision and pain. And with purification, which is done by alphecati and is digital, the one that shoemakers use, the incision at the tip of the male member is not protected because it quickly enters its hole.
But in the operation with a nail, be careful to avoid iron and spoil your operation. And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, proven by experiment, I have discovered for myself, because the scissors are of proportional incision, in such a way that the sharpness above is as much as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharp edges, and cut accordingly in one go in the same time; and it is made compression with thread in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from every side, with which there is no error at all.
And the way to perform the first operation is that you make the child stay if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything but tie the thread on his penis alone, and leave it there until the next day.
Here is the translation of the given sentence into English, keeping in mind the similarities between the text's language and Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French: And then make the patient stand between your hands, prepare them in advance and do not let them move; hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on the child's member and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the penis is visible, and then clean it of any impurities that have accumulated in it due to filthiness.
The shape of the scissors for cleaning, this is how they should be shaped:
This appears to be a description of the preparation of nails for some medical or surgical purpose. Here's a possible translation:
But the mistake in cleansing is that you remove the entire internal chain or a part of it too quickly.
Therefore, you should stretch the affected area with your finger for one hour and then carefully cut it according to its shape.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with tweezers and cut it.
But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed under the skin, then leave it until the swelling subsides, and carefully remove the affected area, cutting it according to your preparation.
And be careful with the head of the vein, for it will not be there.
Therefore, treat it with something that solidifies the wound using the powders we have mentioned in the section on powders.
And if the vein has been cut too much and it follows the above parts, this will not matter to him.
And treat it with what we have said until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction from stone or congealed blood, or from pus or a polyp, and similar things as we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the stone has not been dissolved with the water we have mentioned and the cause has been vigorously applied to the patient, then you should administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: Let it be of silver and be as thin as a reed, likewise as a quill from a bird's feather, with the thinness of a ray long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there should be a fine channel at its head.
And the manner of urine extraction through this is that you take a ribbon folded in two and tie it at its end with wool or cotton for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the ribbon into the part below the syringe, and cut off any excess material from the wool with scissors, but insert it firmly into the channel. And then fill the syringe with water and egg white.
And make the patient lie down on their left side, and insert a catheter into their bladder and penis with moistened oils, olive oil, and hyssop.
And then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then introduce the catheter into that opening; and then introduce it until it reaches the bladder, which will indicate to the patient that they have reached the void. If this is not done in this order, it should be done according to the meatus through which the urine flows.
And then gradually extend the thread with wool little by little, because the urine will wet the wool.
Then extract it and perform the urination cure, using a catheter, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
About the quality of bladder irrigation with instruments and similar devices that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe burning, and you want to distill water and medicine into it, this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and its form is as follows:
If the extremity (such as a foot or hand) of the patient is numb, it means that it is paralyzed. And in that case there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
At the beginning there is a hollow place where this thing is peeled off, and according to its quantity it is pulled out without any addition, until when some cause pulls the humidity out of it, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is pulled out again with water, and if it is expelled long, like a clamp that holds naptha in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity and pull with it the water that is peeled off from the upper parts, because the humidity is pulled into the hollow of the clamp.
And then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as we have described in the surgery; and then pull out the humidity with water that you use to peel it off, because that humidity goes straight to the bladder, and the patient feels relief.
The form of the subtle plaster with which the bladder is plastered, and this is its form:
And let it be made of silver or lead, with the end resembling a small feather, and then insert it gently inside.
And then take the bladder of an animal, place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize, and then tie it securely with a double ligature between two strong bands, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the vessel.
And then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has entered the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a bag of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are turned inside out; and then add the circle in such a way that it is sewn together like a sack, since you will place in it water or any of the moistures, oils, and waters.
And then tie that [bag] to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Here is a possible translation for "Capitol .lx.":
About the removal of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medications, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
We have also discussed the stone that is operated on with the hand and by cutting it out.
And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is placed in the bladder.
And I will now describe it with clear and concise exposition.
So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly occurs in children; and among its signs is that the urine exiting the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with sand in it; and the patient shakes their penis frequently, and often it is difficult to raise; and with this there are frequent feces.
And the healing of children from this before they reach fourteen years is easier, and in the elderly it is difficult to cure. But in young people it is more likely because of this, which is among them.
And that one whose stone is larger and the cure is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Here's a translation of the given text:
And then the patient should be taken with his feet and placed in a position such that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or exits from its place occasionally.
And then prepare the scissors between your hands, and let his hands be underneath his body, so that the entire bladder is made to tilt downwards towards the lower parts.
And then look for it and remove all of it from there.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut into him with the scissors.
And if it doesn't come out with your touch alone, then you should anoint the index finger of your left hand with oil - if the patient is a child, or the little finger if he is a young man - and insert it into his anus. And look for the stone inside until you find it under your finger. And turn it little by little until it is in the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it out towards the outside parts through the place where you cut.
And order the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant to extend the knees upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand pull the cord that is below the knees, in the place where the cut is made.
And then interpose a spatula, of which this is the form: and cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but closer to the lower part of the left hip; and let the section be on that stone, and your finger should be in the anus, and let the cut be transverse, so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone can be removed without causing damage, and no more, because if you press too hard with your finger that is in the anus, the stone will come out easily.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, which makes their removal difficult.
And those like this resemble a bean, are round, and make for easy removal.
Therefore, if it is the type with angles and edges, insert into the cleft.
And if it cannot be removed that way, then you must contrive something over it, or press something on it with a suitable tool, the tip of which should be like a file with which you can grind on the stone without it breaking; or insert a fine instrument with a curved tip underneath it.
But if you cannot do so on that one, then widen the opening slightly. And if you see a flow of blood, cut it strongly with dissolved vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at first you should insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut it out; then you should make a small incision nearby; and similarly act if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to cut it with a large incision, because two things may happen to the patient: either death or continuous dripping of urine, because the area may not be completely healed.
But arrange to expel it while it is still fresh, or contrive to break it with forceps so that you can extract the pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with powdered aloe and dragon's blood, and press it firmly. And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil of roses and cold water, over it to help reduce the swelling.
And then make the patient lie on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when that swelling has subsided, soak the area with water and plenty of oil. Then treat it with an ointment called diaphycon and another called diabaseilon until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess forms that is tense and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood in the bladder is congealed, which prevents urination (and this is known by the presence of blood in the urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will cause the bladder to become corrupt and the patient to putrefy.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of spices, using what is appropriate for their healing until it is healed.
And during all the hours of treatment, you should lift both the cushions and adjust the medicines placed on the wound.
And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with water that I recommended earlier before it becomes too dry, because excessive drying from this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experimented with this, and what you should do is take a drill made of soft iron, which looks like this:
"From an acute, triangular projection, placed in a stick.
"Then take thread and tie it to the rod, placing a weight beneath so that it does not return to the bladder.
"Then insert the iron into the rod, piercing until the piercer reaches that stone. "And turn the piercer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you will pierce its opening until you make it penetrate on the other side; because the urine is immediately released.
"Then press your hand over the hole that has been made on the side of the stone outside the rod, because it is blocked and plugged with urine, and the patient is healed.
"But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread on top of the stone. "Then place between the two ties on the rod over the stone. "Then remove that. "Then untie the bandage and clean the congealed blood, which is in the wound.
"And it is not necessary to bandage with thread under the stone, only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage on top only, because when the thread is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary for you to raise the sheet above them, lifting the bedding over the parts, or return to your task, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capítulo LXI (Chapter 61).
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
However, if stones occur in any of them, then its cure is difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
One reason is that the woman must be very strong (or determined).
And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who is learned enough to reveal herself to the doctor when she is chaste or has no husband.
The third reason is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially for operations by hand.
And the fourth reason is that the place of incision for stones in women is far from the place of the stone, which requires a preliminary incision, and this involves fear (or risk). ️
However, if necessity forces you to do so, then it is necessary for you to take a very learned midwife, and few are found. ️
Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Therefore, if you find it, cut it off from under its skin, and then instruct the patient to urinate onto it.
But if she is not a virgin, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and still press on the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Therefore, if you find it, then you should gradually push it out of the bladder opening towards the lower abdomen with the help of your skill until it reaches the level of the pelvis.
Then press down on the top of the vagina to the level of the pelvis, wherever it may be blocked, and place the stone in that area, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting underneath it.
And at first the incision should be small; and then introduce the razor into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size you know the stone will be expelled from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are many: for there are few and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and with furrows.
Therefore, you should know how many spices are from him based on what you indicate about what you want.
And if you see blood flow, place powdered vitriol on the spot and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped. Then return to your operation to ensure the stone is completely removed.
And make sure you have prepared with yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones from men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and press it with wool and a bandage, and do not remove this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for soon the patient will die. Then care for the wound.
Therefore, after the bleeding has stopped and some days have passed, you should return to your operation to ensure that the stone is completely removed.
Chapter 62.
On making an incision for an inguinal hernia.
A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac that remains outside the testicle containing the semen, and it is called a sac.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And the cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the testicles, because this material is infiltrated into them, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow on the testicles.
And this humidity has various colors, because its color can be either yellowish, reddish, bloody, black and foul-smelling, or watery white, with the latter being most common.
And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is present are these: because if it is in the white cyst that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round and slightly elongated like an egg, and the testicle appears, since the humidity contains that part from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round with an egg-like division and therefore it is believed to be another egg.
And if the humidity is between the sack of the testicles and the white cyst, then act as if it does not exist.
And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the abscess with a small piece of cloth whose shape is preceded; and judge what is inside according to what appears on the cloth's trace.
Sure, let's translate this line by line:
This line translates as:
And then sit on the left side of the patient, and command an assistant to stand at the right side of the patient, who should extend his arm towards one of two sides, at the base of the genitals and the beginning of the groin.
And then take a spatula, cut the scrotum from the middle part as deep as you can near the penis.
And then perform the section according to the rule, equally distant from the line you should draw along the scrotum, until it reaches the white cord (vas deferens).
And cut it, and observe, and be careful not to cut through it; and your incision with which you cut should be suspended with the most and most delicate instrument according to the size possible for you.
And then pierce the white cord full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cord to its ends above; and do not touch the scrotum enclosing the genitals, and cut the cord in whatever manner is possible for you. And cut it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to cut the vessels that are on the ligaments, and extract the egg, and then cure it with what we have said.
But if the water is added in two equal parts, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part just as you did with the other one; and if it appears to be one operation, then do it.
And then you clean the blood, and place between the cuts wool soaked in oil or rosemary-infused oil; and put another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil outside, and spread it over two thin cloths and the navel area. Then cover all this with a doubled cloth and bandages, and tie them securely following this manner:
And then take two cloths and soak them in wool like this; make the edges with which you press tightly with cotton or wet wool, and add them securely in the groin area of the breeches, and one of the ends should go from the buttocks to the back, and the second one should go to the scrotum, and two more ends below and two others on the thighs, and all this binding should be tied securely in the groin area of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting with iron; it is that you take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and that you incise with it the neck of the scrotum, and it is ignited according to what we have counted until the white thread containing the water is discovered, and then you take a cautery of this form: And it resembles a Greek letter.
Then you perforate with that thread and heat until all the moisture is expelled.
Then you extend the thread with scissors, scrape it with scissors, and scrape it with a heated subtle cautery; and incise that as much as possible until everything is eradicated; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if you encounter an abscess during the cutting or during the cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat the contrariety according to what is appropriate for it, with a cure that is suitable for it as stated.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then you should perform a perforation as I instruct here; and it is when you are certain, because of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia contains water.
Based on the provided context and the pattern of translation you've started, here is my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And it is necessary to open a wide passage so that all the water can flow through.
And then place cotton over the area, tie it down and leave it there to allow the remaining water to drain out. And then treat that (area) until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you puncture it: and this is done only because the white skin in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the discharge of water. Therefore, you should insert into the wound a weight or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsical patients, as described previously; or attach to the surface of the wound a small vessel.  (Note: "dropiscal" refers to an accumulation of fluid in the body)
And know that the water will return, and it should be drained again after about six months or a year; and when it accumulates again, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will continue to have this condition.
Chapter 63.
On incising a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in incising this fleshy hernia there is the risk of losing it to destruction in the major dispositions; therefore, I have seen its release and being saved by that which is better.
And I remember the procedure for that and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies of those whose humors are not well-balanced, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an acute and bitter excess of humor that has penetrated the humors, or due to a blow.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body, and it is not found in pain; this is a serious abscess.
And if the abscess is hard and has a dark color, there is no feeling of it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of blood vessels, or by inflammation to the point that its memory can be perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
However, what is caused by the inflammation of blood vessels can be recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it is pressed with the fingers; and one should not touch it.
But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to any cause, except for the compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of abscess an incision can be made, as well as on other flesh; and this is done by making an incision in the skin, then spreading the egg-like substance over the parts, and extracting the white from it, and freeing the suspenders of the vessels, and tying them off, and making an incision in the suspenders after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.  (Note: The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for lancing an abscess.)
Therefore, if the egg has already been consolidated with those meats, then it is necessary that you extract the egg and inject this one.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause of scarring, or between the bowel loops, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and inject this one with a round syringe.
But if it is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then it is necessary that you inject everything that comes from it, and extract the egg as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
About the treatment of a hernia that is caused by wind.
Wind is a swelling wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear is aroused by that which is recalled beforehand.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to say operation on that one according to what the first ones did.  (This sentence is a bit confusing and could have multiple interpretations. The phrase "empero cove que diguam" can be translated as "nevertheless, it is necessary to say")
And I say that it is necessary to place the patient on an elevated chair; then remove the suspenders of the testicles from below; and take the tail of the genitals with your hands and place them between the thighs; and have another assistant hold those, and extend them with great force.
Then cut transversely with a sharp knife through the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape all around as we have told you in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a double thread into those [wounds], and tie it at the first place where you see life, and tie it again at the last [place]. Then cut those [wounds] straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated of the foul and corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want sanity to be generated, so that the vessels do not swell up and block one of the two testicles, because it is not bad for that.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Sure, I can help with that. However, without the full text of "Capitol .lxv." it's a bit challenging to provide an accurate translation. Could you please share the entire content or at least more of the passage? This will allow me to understand the context better and provide a more precise translation.
"On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a dryness that extends over the abdomen from the groin to the navel, because some of the intestines protrude from that opening.
And this rupture is either of the groin or the navel, and these two types occur for various reasons: a blow, a fall, a loud noise, an intense emotion, or a similar cause.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the groin, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and does not happen suddenly; it is like an abscess formed within the belly because the groin presses on the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to dryness of the groin, because at first it causes sudden and severe pain; it appears as a different kind of swelling below the navel, which is due to the protrusion of the intestine and its body being exposed outside the groin.
And sometimes, the peritoneum is included with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an inguinoscrotal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes a tear occurs in the intestine, which becomes trapped there, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressure is applied.
And in treating this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid burning in that area.
And the manner of performing this operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inner parts of its cavity if they obey the command, and then place your fingers under their chin, lifting their legs.
Then place the scrotum, which is the scrotum of the testicles, on top, and cut the scrotum entirely along its length; then insert two needles into the lips of the incision, as needed, to open the incision with them.
And if the opening is such that it is possible to pass an egg through it.
Then remove that scrotal skin which remains below the testicular sac until the white hard sac is revealed from each side.
Then insert your finger into that which is the testicle, between the white sac, which remains under the scrotal sac, and between the two sacs, and release with it the adhesion that is in the back of the egg.
Here's the translation of the provided text:
"And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white, hard sheet. "But if you find any cause of it, then remove that to the stomach.
And then cut into the area below the cord of the testicles, so that blood and pus flow out as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white cloth is cauterized, which we have said near the incision to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens). Leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if its healing is delayed, then dip it in hot water and place it on the area until it falls off, as we have said.
Then treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
About hernias that are swollen or filled with air.
In this type of hernia, it is not recommended to treat it with iron.
And the first (doctors) said that it is treated in the same way as we have recommended for hernias with blood vessels; which is to tie the vessels near the incision gently; and then dry in the middle of the area around the swelling with hot water until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Sometimes a dislocation occurs in the joints as we have said, and swelling appears at the site.
Do not attribute any cause to the intestines in the case of the patient; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all cases.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is a fixed fissure in the intestines until the intestine descends into the intestines; and this happens due to the extension of the intestines which is in the joints as we have said, the cause of which is that the intestines are extended, and then it becomes softened and the site becomes inflamed and swollen.  (Note: The repetition of "ciphac" should be corrected to "intestines")
And its treatment is with a cautery as was previously mentioned in the account.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry the site of the dislocation swelling with a cut along its length according to the quantity of three times.
And then strengthen the white ribbon that is under the hood until it is revealed.
And then take the needle and place it over the prominent part of the ribbon, and press it against the stomach's wall.
And then sew together the two prominent ends of the ribbon with a stitch, securing one end to the other.
And then extract the remaining part of the ribbon, and do not cut all of it from the hood, nor stretch the opening, or any other similar cause as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat it with the wound dressing method, and after cutting the threads, cleanse the area and heal the wound until it is healed; because the hood is constricted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
Cauterization is better in this case, as it is more likely to be effective.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Often the scrotum of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh within it becomes softened, and its guarding is diminished.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if you wish, in the beginning soften the excess of the cord with three or four cookings and secure it firmly with a stitch.
Then cut between the stitches; then treat for the healing of the other diseases until it is healed and the threads fall off.
Chapter LXIX.
Of Castration
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but I have heard of it being done and will mention it here in this book; and the reason for mentioning it is twofold: one is so that it may be known to doctors when they are asked about it, that they know the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the other reason is that sometimes we need castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as with bulls, goats, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision and section.
But in that which is done by traction, the way of the operation is to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down. And then take those with your hand inside so that they are resolved and do not appear after touching them.
But in the case of castration done by cutting and slicing, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision over each testicle with a single cut until two testicles are processed.
And then cut those that you will have skinned. And do not leave anything on those of the scrotum for any reason, except for a thin layer that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better when done by crushing, because crushing firmly removes any cause of the testicles so that the animal no longer desires mating.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter .70
On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there is an opening where the scrotum should be, between the two testicles, in which a female organ appears with pubic hair.
And sometimes from that pain, urine is expelled which is in the tail of the testicles.
But in women, it is of a certain kind: and that is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis is like two male testicles, a little smaller at the external part, just like the male foreskin with two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you press those tightened flesh until the pressure of that pain dissipates, and then treat them with the remedy for other diseases.
And in the second kind of men, from which urine is expelled that is in the tail of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for him.
Chapter 21.
Of swelling and prominent flesh due to female causes.
A strong swelling is bound by natural causes until it is pressed and care is taken; and sometimes in some women, it becomes so prominent that it spreads as in men and reaches during intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold the excess swelling with your hand or a compress and press it down.
And do not ultimately press, especially in the region of the ribs, so that it does not cause bleeding.
And then care for it with a remedy for wounds until it is healed.
However, flesh born is flesh that is born in the horrible manner of the mother until it fills her, and weakly exits to the outer parts according to its appearance (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"). Therefore, we must press it like a leech, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .72
On the treatment of herpes (or shingles).
Herpes is when the woman's vagina is not perforated, or is very narrow. And it can be either natural or accidental.
An accidental herpes is due to previous illness, and this can be caused by inadequate flesh or subtle and dense fat.
And it can occur in the region of the mother's womb, or on her hips, or on the upper part of her, or on the lower part of her. It is forbidden to have intercourse and conception and childbirth, and greatly forbidden during menstruation.
And the recognition of that is done by examining the womb. If it appears swollen, then it is certain; but if not, you should search for it with your fingers or with a ray [of light].
But if the swelling is subtle and close to both lips, then you cut and disrupt it.
And [you] place [your fingers] on the two lips of the vulva, and then place your thumbs together on both sides at the same time.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread, and then you spread both lips with force until that subtle swelling is broken open and the swelling is revealed.
And then you take wool, drench it in oil and place it on the area, and have someone stay with her for the day to prevent the cut from healing too quickly.
But if the swelling is large and thick, then you should cut it with a lancet or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the swelling is due to an abscess, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open.
And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not easily closed.
And keep it for some days and apply a dry compress to it.
And then treat it with the other healing method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens during the birth of other children, and then you should proceed according to this manner. But if it is due to cancerous abscesses, then do not oppose the abscess in the mother with iron in any way.
Chapter 73
Of the care for hemorrhoids and tail, and red boils that occur in the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are the outlets of many veins, from which blood flows continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids, they become thin.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thin ones, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then do not treat them with iron. ️
But those that are in the womb of the mother, on which sensation is felt, are those that are healed.
And you should place the woman in a cold environment and then extend her limbs with scissors or rough cloth, and cut those [fetuses] with the razor.
And then sprinkle on those [fetuses] the flow of blood from one of the powdered herbs that have no bitterness, such as anise and similar ones.
And then wrap the patient's feet for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels, and walnuts and similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with water on the patient's back.
And if the blood has stopped, it is good; and if not, make it coagulate with two cupping glasses, and at the breasts without scarification.
And then take wool and soak it with the juice of coriander or with the juice of wild marjoram or with the juice of lavender with strong vinegar, and make it adhere to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
"And care for him until he is healed.
"Chapter 74.
"The perforation of the intestine happened in the mother.
"Many types of abscesses occurred in the mother, such as cramp, lap indent, ulcer, adhubelat, herpetomas, fistulas emorroyas, raguarrias, thyll, and other abscesses. "And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of them and their signs and their cures in the division.
"And I should speak in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the mother when it is one of the abscesses that collects pus, and if you want to know how its operation is done with iron.
"Therefore, you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with throbbing and fever, and if you see it reddening and feel heat on it, then do not cut it with perforation, and care for it with what helps in maturation until the sharpness of the incidents ceases.
Based on the context and the language used in the previous lines, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then the midwife follows the path of the right and left labia, using the instrument with which she has opened the orifice of the mother, whose form will be described in the following cases.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the pubic bone of the mother and ensure that only a small part of the instrument enters the mother's body, just enough to reach the patient. However, if the instrument is larger than the pubic bone of the mother, then place cloths on top of the pubic bone to prevent any part of the instrument from entering the mother's body.
And it is necessary that you place the thread running along the length of the instrument on the left side, and have the person administering the instrument hold it while turning the thread until the mother's orifice is opened.
And when the birth appears, and it is touched by hand and is slippery and wet, then it is necessary that you dry off its head with a spatula.
And when the placenta is expelled, then it is necessary that you place a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some healing properties on the wound and apply pressure to the pubic bone of the mother.
E place outside the mother and over the pillow clean wool soaked in water in which mallows are boiled.
And it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that is suitable to use until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed in this way: they are crystallized with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled the root of lily or of long aristolochia, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then it is necessary that you be forbidden from treating him with iron, having care of that with water as we said in the division.
Chapter .75.
To teach the midwives in what manner the swollen breasts are to be treated when they come out according to a non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and that when you see the woman expelling from the sides and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is relieved because of what comes out of her during childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the breast, then know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the exit of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the navel.
When you see those signs, it is necessary to press the patient's abdomen so that the baby descends slightly. As soon as it rests on its head, give the patient a second dose, and it is cleaned of those excesses with good cleaning.
However, that which is the other part is unnatural and unpraiseworthy, for when the baby exits through its feet and the body of the baby comes out in front of its head and its feet, or one hand of the baby, either at its foot, or the head of the baby with its hands comes out at its stomach, and quickly it is converted on its neck, and it resembles the unpraiseworthy figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to guard against errors and deceptions.
And I am showing all the figures of those, and what is contained in them, so that it may be indicated by this and may be stated thusly.
When the foot comes out first by natural difficulty, and it is very hard on the woman and becomes difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already weakened, then she should perform this procedure, or what the women have him do, and evaporate his head with a fenugreek-based potion and moist oils.
And then insert the midwife's small spatula between her legs and separate with it the second membrane, or cut that one with her nail until the water comes out from inside it. And press on the woman's belly until the baby is expelled.
But if it does not come out, then the woman must be anointed with little mucilage and fenugreek mucilage with scissors.
And then order her, quickly anoint her, and make her cough with conditions; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the baby will be born soon after.
And if both hands of the baby have already come out at first, then it is necessary that you push them back little by little with gentleness. But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and quickly turn the chair over on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall because of the shock.
And if the hands are not turned back inside and the baby dies, then incise those [hands] and extract the membrane of the baby or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and extract it equally, because that will be born soon after.
When the baby comes out onto the mother's feet, you should then pull it up towards you, and then turn the baby so that its face is facing downwards, and then take one of its feet and gently pull it out, little by little.
But as soon as it has come out into the space between the legs, then command it to expel itself, and make her cough with care, because it will be a boy if God wills it.
And if it is not a boy as we have said, then you should return the baby little by little until you place it in the natural position, because it will be a boy with an easy birth.
And if it is prevented by all that we have said, then take some powder of althea and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and then anoint the woman's vulva with it, as low as her belly. And then make her sit in warm water, until she reaches the hips.
And when you see that the parts coming out of her are softened, then make for her a smoke bath with myrtle and place it under her. When you perform sublimation fumigation for an hour, then make the patient lie down on a bed of coals, and then induce sneezing and open his mouth, and remove that, and apply light pressure to the lowest part of his abdomen, because it will cause immediate defecation.
Certainly! Let's break down this sentence: Here's my translation of the provided text:
And if he cannot walk, then make him lie down on the bed, and shake his body vigorously, and immediately apply poultices which I have recommended from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has arrived, then make that woman sit on a chair, and immediately study the reduction of the hand, and place the fetus according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inward until it is expelled.
Similarly, with the child on his back, spread out his hands and place him facing his mother's back. Let the midwife hold the child’s hand and then gradually turn that little one to her side, making it easier for them.
And when and as soon as the child is turned, then place on his hip what we have recommended from oil and mucilage.
And then command her to move slowly little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command her to press down; and make her sneeze with caution. The expulsion of the fetus is prepared on the side.
When it is time to remove the placenta according to this method, consider doing so. And then you slice through the uterus with your fingernail until it is emptied of fluid.
And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you should cut the umbilical cord to prevent it from being strangled and dying.
And then you should carefully extract the child from within until you place it in an appropriate position, and instruct the woman to breathe deeply several times. The child will be expelled gently with this method, if God wills it.
Birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born in many instances, and sometimes three or four [at once], but this is rare and unfortunate; however, there are natural causes for this, not evil ones.
And count them, whether they are multiplied or not, as one afterbirth. They are separated by the navel string in each of those and sometimes they are expelled like a single child through natural gentle birth, and sometimes they are expelled through unnatural birth as we have mentioned earlier.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and skill, and with patience, and is inventive according to every shape as it has been prepared by the mind leading to health.
And remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Sometimes in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed. I have verified that a woman has aborted and given birth to six, and another ten, all fully formed, and this was caused by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, for she must pay close attention to that small appearance, and therefore attend to it as needed.
Chapter 76
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet exited, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents for which her loss is feared.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side, with her head inclined downward and her hips raised.
Based on the pattern of the previous translation, here is a line-by-line attempt to translate the given sentence:
And then you moisten the mouth of his mother with oils and mucilage of flaxseed, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then you anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand gently into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the nails are located in the womb.
And in this case: then consider if the child is ready to be born with its head first; then place the nails in his heels, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or under his chin, or on his collarbone, or near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
But if the delivery is with his feet first, then in the heel, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you hold the nails with your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand gently and place the nails in one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the cause of its discomfort.
And then place and put in the position of it another nail, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction and not just extension according to its straightness alone.
Based on the pattern of the provided translation and the context of medieval medical treatises, here's my best guess for the translation:
And it is necessary in the patient that between them the extension be softened; and if some part of him is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert those skillfully and move with those things that are retained.
Therefore, if the part of the baby is forgotten, then the fingers should be rearranged in the place where it is more outside; and do this until the entire baby is delivered.
But if the hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it because of the baby’s narrowness, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And you should do the same for the other hand and for both feet.
But if the head of the baby is large, or there is difficulty in delivery, or there is water retained in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thin spatula and split the head and extract the water, or discover that with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Based on the context provided and the pattern of the text, here's a line-by-line translation:
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you must make an incision so that the humidity in the feet is released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.
"And if the abdomen of the patient is swollen or they are suffering from dropsy, then it is necessary to pierce that place to release the moisture within.
"But if the foot is on their own feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is also light.
"But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary for you to extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and the feet until water runs out from them.
"But if the other limbs are removed and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into the womb, and with it seek the head, and draw that with these words towards the mother's mouth. And then she should insert one or two fingers into the child, and pull it with those.
"And if the mother's mouth is constricted by swelling that occurs in her, then it should not be opened up; instead, it is necessary to administer a lavage of fatty and moist substances. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the wound is on his side, then, if possible, it should be cauterized: and the treatment mentioned for a living person should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed.
And one should ensure that no cause remains inside the second layer of skin.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned for the care of wounds which occur from a mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another live one pressed against it, and the other fetus is also dead. It happened to him that he had a long-standing abscess in his navel; and it swelled inside until it burst open, and he began to pass arms.
And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Based on the pattern of the previous translations and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation:
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead man.
And then I examined the wound, and extracted from him some bones, the woman who was in her thousandth condition, and had lived thus for a long time, ran away from him with a little of his arm.
And I did not find this to be strange, because in this there is skill and assistance for what the doctor can do with his hand for treatment.
Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the body.
Shape of the inverted cup with which it is opened:
This is the shape of the stretcher on which the books are cut, and at this cutting there are two cups at the ends of two legs. However, this cup should be more subtle than narrower, and it should be made either from ebony or boxwood.
And the width of each leg should be two fingers and the margin of each also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two legs there are two joints of the same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional things should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she can open with them when you turn both prescribed wheels.
Another similar shape, but more subtle and lighter.
It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two similar additions, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these, then have the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging off the edge, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount you want of the opening of the mother's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of the wheel which the ancients called:
Form for pushing with which the child is pushed out.
Form of friendship, with which the large head is confined
And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as seen before, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as seen before, with teeth like saw teeth with which it is cut and confined. It looks like there was an issue with displaying the full text of the source sentence. Could you please provide the complete sentence again? I'd be happy to help translate it.
"Forma" in this context appears to mean "way" or "manner." "Unci" seems to be a misspelling of "uncy," which likely refers to the scapula (shoulder blade) or a similar part of the body. "Havent" is related to "having" and "una spina" means "a thorn.
"Forma of a salve having two needles:
"Forma of a spoon having two ends with which the head is separated:
"Forma of two wide spoons:
"All these instruments are practiced, and the more varied and prepared they are by the craftsmen, the lighter their operation becomes and more beneficial to men in quantity.
"And you should not lack any of those instruments wherever you are, because the need for them is not negligible.
"On the extraction of the placenta.
"When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you should command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by pinching [her nose], and strengthen your hand over her mouth and her nostrils, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
"And if not, then you take a cup and make a hole in the cover, and place in it burning herbs such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian mastic, cinnamon wood, and St. John's wort. Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we said before, and the second wind will be expelled with speed.
But if this treatment persists and does not work, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the second wind with it. When you have found it, take hold of it and extract it little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second wind, extract it little by little according to the correct method so that the mother does not suffer a violent contraction. It is necessary for the ribs on the right and left sides to be easily moved.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with snuffing and a medicine made from oil with herbs.
Sure, let's translate the provided text line by line:
Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
"However, some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
"The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for retained menstrual blood and afterbirth is as follows:
"It should be made of glass or iron.
"And the thin end should be placed in the woman's vagina while the wider end is held over the fire, with the fumigation being done over the coals of the fire.
"And this should be repeated until that fumigation is completely consumed and another one is added.
"About the treatment for a non-ruptured childbirth.
"If a child is born and its membranes are not ruptured, which is called a thin and delicate birth. "Then it is necessary for the midwife to rupture those membranes with her finger; if not, she should rupture them with a sharp spoon, taking care not to touch the navel.
"And then place on it wool soaked in wine and oil; and then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
"But if you fear that it is delicate, then insert a tube into the opening for several days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
And if an abscess occurs on the buttocks due to the solidification of a wound or an aposteme (a swelling caused by infection); then it is necessary that this solidification be cut open, and afterwards it should be treated with the water we have mentioned for treatment and healing.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below (in the lower parts of the body).
The fistulas that occur in the lower parts of the body are called nodes and are quite large, which usually occur near the buttocks on the outside or in the space between the thighs.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when this node is old and exudes white, watery fluid or fine pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas may penetrate.
And those penetrating ones are known by the fact that it exits from them by egression and flatulence; and sometimes the patient feels the egression, and then worms exit from them easily.
And sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the opening of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the knee.
Based on the given text and the pattern of translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the new sentence:
If there is swelling in that area, then insert a fine lead probe or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed with any cause of obstruction, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then its indication is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of it so that the place may be healed with medicine.
However, if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is an increase in pain around it, then its sign is that the probe passes through here if there is no swelling within the bone, and there is an increase in pain around the affected area; and that from it comes pus constantly; and that this medicine does not work on it, nor can it be healed with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is labor and futility of the foolish doctors on whom they are fixed.
In that case where it is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I will tell you, and which I have already tried.
And have the patient lie on his back between your hands, with his head raised and legs lifted into the air, the cushions inclined towards his belly, and then carefully insert a lead or silver probe if it is in the fistula area until you know the place where the probe enters.
And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger in there.
And if you feel with your finger the probe already inserted and clearly penetrating by itself, or if you feel between your finger and that a sort of bone or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and in that case do not work on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
However, some say that in some men, it heals late.
And the medicine by which help is hoped for in him is that you make a subtle cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and insert that heated iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fleshy fistulas have become joined like a quill of a bird's feather.
And then care for it with compresses wrapped in linen until all the adjacent flesh is softened, and then care for it with medicines that promote the growth and healing of the flesh. If it is healed, good; if not, then it is never healed by any other treatment.
And if the string enters but does not penetrate into your finger that is in the anus, and there is something between it and the string, such as a piece of flesh or cloth, and sometimes the fistula is visible on the surface of the colon, then dry out the colon from the beginning of the fistula. And you will see that the string dries up with it, and keep doing this until the drying reaches the place where the end of the string can be seen, and through the string it is freed and cut off.
And then cleanse those fistulated fleshes which resemble the hollow tube of a bird's quill, and let none of them remain for any reason.
However, if blood flows when you separate those fleshes from your operation, then it is better to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it unites the adjacent fleshes and dries up the moisture.
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And these are the medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is already cured and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the flesh of the anus and is extended over the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
And so if you feel the hole and between you and it is only a thin layer of fat or flesh, and it is near the surface, then do not operate on it but rather trust in faith and hope.
This condition can be treated in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying it out until you reach its cavity, so that you can insert the medicines and appropriate care; and do not proceed with drying alone for fear of incising the ligament containing the anus, and thus causing involuntary expulsion of the feces; and then treat it with the water we have mentioned, for it will soon be healed. Or, by extending that layer and draining that pus, and drying it out near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp point, and then cleanse those fistulized tissues which are in the section where you can do so with a poultice; and then strive to heal the entire wound with dryness. And if the pus-filled openings above are not healed, and the fistula remains open near the anus, it will be easier for the patient to pass feces. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated probe with a pointed end, which is like a needle used for preparing hearts in this way:
And then insert it wrapped in five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttock deep inside, then you extract the thread from that hole as if you insert your finger into the buttock; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it like this for a day or two. And when the thread is more deeply embedded in the flesh, tighten it until the flesh between the two ends of the thread comes together and fits well.
Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, as long as it is on the surface, for it is not for you to do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do with that until it is healed.
Based on the provided sentences and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"About the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows during incision.
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for either they are like coals in the rectum or those that resemble fatty tissue. "And those are small and large, from which blood flows constantly, either as a single stream or in drops, and they are outside the rectum, on its edges.
"However, those that are outside the anus are of two kinds due to lack of moisture, from which flows yellowish water or a small amount of blood with dung continuously, and they vary in color.
"And the treatment for those inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and press until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you. "Then cut and suspend them with scissors or a hook that you have, and then immediately incise them to their roots.
"But if scissors cannot be used on them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or a woolen cloth, and extract them with the said means, and immediately incise them and sprinkle some hot powders over them near the incision, so that they act as cautery; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those [conditions] with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the feces do not exit, then administer an enema to the patient with an enema that has a small opening, and wash [the patient] with the water that is in the colon and that facilitates slight exit of feces when the patient is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is light, and it is that you should take them with your finger or with a hook, and push them back in, and then cure them with the water we have mentioned until they are healed.
And he who has pushed in [the hemorrhoids], it is necessary that you administer a suture to them according to this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then draw the hemorrhoids towards the two parts above, and make the needle penetrate with the thread into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and transversely; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with a strong ligature, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all (the cushions), and leave one out and do not move it, so that the excess blood may flow from there.
And then place on the affected area a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax; place it on the sore and instruct the patient to rest. And then leave that (cloth) there until it dries; and when it is dry, treat the area with ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
And when they are old and that medicine does not work, then you must scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and you should cover them with a crust of pus, which prevents consolidation; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Then remove them with vigorous scraping until the first time they bleed and are raw; and then treat them until they are healed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.
And then it is necessary to cut away what is around the nail, and it should be held with pincers or tweezers, and it should be removed from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize the following as described in the previous chapter.
However, a wart is a small, rough, round, tuberous growth on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
And the treatment for it is that you should spread and cut it, or you should tighten it with a thread or a hair inside it. And if you wish, cauterize it as we said before, with fire or with sharp medicine.
However, a mole is a small, hairy or large tuberous growth on the surface of the body, commonly found on the forehead, and when cold reaches it, it feels like a formicary bite, and it appears around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a cannula of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it over the mole so that it contains the circle of the cannula from its parts; then turn your hand with the cannula until you cut away what is around the mole, and press it on the forehead of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a bronze or iron tube according to this manner:
And let the opening at the top of the tube be fine and closed (meaning it does not pierce), wrapped so that the sensation on the tongue is softened and the rotation of that [tube].
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery for athelia.
Regarding the forms of the instruments that are administered to give support.
Sometimes support is made of silver or lead or melted bronze; and sometimes those instruments are made small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are chapped or painful, their supports should be small.
The form of a large support is rare:
The top of the tube, in which the bag is tied, should be wide like this; and there should be a separation where the bag is tied, as shown here.
And the lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (meaning not open), thin and long; at one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and a little wider.
And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and its length should be one palm.
And let it [the bag] be punctured by thin tubes in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the tubes is equal to the thickness of a finger.
Then carefully insert into those tubes a strong thread of raw thread, which should be of the same thickness as those threads or wrap them around; and attach to it [the bag] with that [thread]; and when the bag is placed in it [the bladder], tighten the end of the thread between two clips with strong pressure, and then seal each tube with that [thread]: However, the method of sealing with that [thread] is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Then let the patient be placed on their back, and raise their legs up with a pillow underneath them, as is customary for men or a bolster; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then carefully insert it into the rectum; then let the attendant take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press vigorously until all that is in the bladder has been evacuated into the intestine; then remove the bladder, and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, let it be as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it for an entire night, it is more helpful in healing.
And if you treat him with the remedies for stomach ailments and his vomiting persists, then you should continue to use the cautery until he is cured.
And if there are hemorrhoids or painful lumps in the anus, then use a very fine and gentle cautery, like those used to treat infants.
On the treatment of wounds.
I have already mentioned in the division of wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I will discuss the treatment of wounds with both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to how they were made and the location on which they fall.
And the causes by which many times wounds are made are as follows: cutting with a stone, or incision with a knife or sword, or striking with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
But the wounds that are in places of the body are as follows: a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to these among the members.
"And I am recommending the treatment of certain diseases, so that you may follow this reasoning and rule for other diseases.
"And I will begin with simple head diseases, because the memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
"Therefore I say that when there is a simple head injury and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is caused by the striking of a stone or similar object, and only the membrane has been torn and it is a severe injury and you fear an abscess forming on the patient, then cut and bleed the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from him as much blood according to his strength, unless there is some reason against bleeding, especially if the blood that has come out of the wound is little.
"And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded area; and watch that the patient avoids stuffiness, and heavy foods.
"But if any reason prevents bleeding, then let the patient be put on a reduced diet and avoid meat and wine.
"And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, a cloth soaked in oil of roses or in wine that has been boiled down.
Certainly! Here's the translation of your sentence:
And if the air has already changed in that place, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
However, if the wound is large or deep and the lips of it are not approximated by means of stitches, then approximate them with sutures as I will describe to you about the suturing technique.
However, if the wound has already exposed the bone and there is only a small piece of skin remaining, then cut away that piece and treat the wound with medicines to restore the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat only soft foods such as soup and similar items until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the rotten flesh and clean it thoroughly, and then treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should look for the artery. And if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said is not feasible, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, for when it hardens before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of lard oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; let all be well ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and constrict it tightly until it heals well on top, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it firmly above with bandages and leave it thus, without loosening until it is healed, for the medicine will not have been fully drawn from it until it is cured.
And sometimes this alone can be done when there is no lard oil or dragon's blood at hand.
And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and bind them tightly, and recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered yet.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder; rather, at that time treat them with the water we mentioned earlier, so that you place on them some digestive unguents, or you can also place on them a paste of wheat flour with water and honey until they form pus; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if a wound occurs with a bone fracture, and it is small, then you should extract it with a hook.
And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures, which is as follows:
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
However, if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy for it except to avoid treating it with something that causes very strong constriction, such as ziniar and zegi which is vitriol and similar substances that harm the nerves and contract them. And do not place any cauterizing substance on the wound at all, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the coolest part of all the members.
And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then bandaged when washed with warm water and the other powders diminishing in this manner, and moistened ointments.
"But if the wound is large, then apply stitches or clamp the lips of it, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
"But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the body, then perforate it at its most depressed point.
"But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
"But if the lips of the anus have already been cut or completely, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then close the lips of the anus with a suture over the bone of the anus and do not touch it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
"But if the wound has already been made in the bone, then probe it; and if there are bone fragments, extract all that you can of them; and what is not accessible to you, leave until the wound putrefies, and separates, and the ulceration is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. But if in the wound there is an abscess, then treat it with water of which the memory will come to you shortly in this chapter.
If it is a strike from a lance or dagger, and you see its depth, then consider also if there is any hissing sound when the patient breathes; in that case, know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is not much depth and the wound is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour sprinkle on it powder, and do not constrict it so that the blood is not held in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient, but put on it an attractive ointment, and unwrap it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then place on the opening of the wound clean cotton so that it absorbs the moisture from the humors; and make the patient lie down on the wound so that the fluid within it can flow out.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays = But/However
And if the wound is by cutting with a knife or a sword and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then cure it with the water that has been prepared for suturing if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already affected the bone and you have cut out pieces of it, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, as their extraction is made easier.
And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said before.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium.
And a small rupture is done in another way, and know that their reduction is more difficult if you do not seize the opportunity to return them to their place quickly, because it swells and thickens, making its insertion difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is the middle one, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the closure of the abdomen is done in four ways, but there are two common stitches that are also suitable for closing other wounds of the body.
And two other stitches are common to other wounds, but nevertheless they are more specific for the closure of the abdomen.
And I will describe and explain each one to you.
So I say that when the wound is small and there is some intestine protruding through it, and it is difficult to reduce, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has swollen due to the cold air.
And therefore when this happens, you must shave it so that you can immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil it with vinegar, cypress, spice, and cloves, until the swelling is reduced.
"And sometimes this is done with an herb that has astringent properties, and it is better than water alone for reducing the swelling.
"And when you see the swelling being resolved, then wet the intestine with water in which althea and mallow have been soaked, because through this the patient's discomfort is relieved to a great extent.
"But if the patient's discomfort persists despite this treatment, then make a small incision with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
"And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate to avoid incision, and thus prevent weakness and debility from occurring.
"Regarding the instrument, see its form:
"One part of it is a sharp curve, and the other part is not sharp; its tip is fine, but it should not be as fine as a needle, rather it should be slightly blunt.
"And thus when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine is visible, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, as this is better.
"But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise the head and feet higher than the sides.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always place your attention and consideration on this, so that the part where the wound is located is higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary for you to administer this in both large and small wounds.
And in the small wounds, place that which is prepared, and then make sure that the person administering it is between your hands, holding the entire disruption with their hand and adjusting its lips, and then discover from there to whom it might be necessary for some other reason.
And this is the common manner of suturing: you should take one needle or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; and then pass it from the end of the disruption of the little finger, and strengthen the needle with one, other than putting a thread in both ends of the cord, with both ends of the cloth that is under the cord of the parts inside, until you make that penetrate through that part; and when you have added two ends of the cord and two ends of the cloth, and made four knots.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And the needles should be intermediate between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles penetrate the flesh too easily; and coarse ones are difficult to insert into the vein; therefore, they should be intermediate in fineness and coarseness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be placed at the two ends of the vein very close, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound opens before its healing.
And they should not be prolonged in suture, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; and you shall place on the suture powdered pills expanded from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound has healed.
And these types of suture with needles are most suitable for small wounds, because in the suture of their one needle or two or around that number are used.
But the second type of suture is common: and it is that you administer with a suture the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the cup, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped in equal measure of fineness and coarseness.
And then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from the same point at which it began, so that the thread can be pulled and gather the pus from the upper part of the wound, ensuring that the suture is as tight as the stitching of cloth.
And between each suture, place an amount equal to the thickness of the little finger.
This is called "stitching" by men.
And with this stitching, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly by a sword, and the opening of the wound was greater than a palm's width, and it had protruded around two palms of the intestine from its middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the member; then I returned that which the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cared for him and he recovered; and then he lived for many years after, and continued with his usual activities.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine could be applied, but I placed a cotton cloth on the wound twice a day and washed it continually with honey water until he was healed.
Based on the context and similarity to Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And it is that you begin with stitching the wound, and insert the needle from the outside inward.
And then, as the needle penetrates the wound and you insert sutures along its entire length, leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside out in the other extremity of the incision.
And when you have done this penetration, then do it again in the same extremity of the incision from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside out.
And make the needle penetrate with that thread, making sure it passes through the entire length of the suture so that all of it is inside.
And then begin from this same side and sew with that end of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the wound, and then return it to the wound and sew the end of the thread on the other side with this end of the suture; and remove that from the wound which is on the far side. >".
And do this one time and another, and do it once more close to another time until you cook everything that is outside according to that example.
And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of skin, with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew it one time from the end of the tail, and let the other time go until you have completed it.
However, the second type of suture, which is also called Gualia and is recommended by him, is that you sew it according to the half-lute technique with which some doctors sew it, so that they unite all divided parts to their corresponding part by nature; and they apply the end of one to the other end of it, and this is done as I recommend to you.
Make sure you place the needle in the end of the thread to your right of the divided part, and make it penetrate into the divided part in that same way, and let the two ends of the thread go; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two ends of the thread.
And then you should rotate those parts, and make each of them penetrate from the inside out to the two ends of the miraculous thread, except for those that are in the opposite leg.
And this manner of suturing is better than common superficial suturing, and it is the suturing method that was previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Gaul
And they may call it differently, some might say that the abdominal suture is performed with two needles, in such a way that you insert into each of them a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from which side you wish to start, and make that needle penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method used by those who stitch hearts equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment on wound treatment is the same as for other wounds.
Because when you find the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines and stitch it up properly, then place on it powder that promotes healing.
And if the air has already affected the wound, then place on it thick ointments that you have at hand until they form a hard scab and cover the threads, and are consolidated and checked; then treat it as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
But if the necessary medicines are not present, then immediately place something on it as soon as the discharge begins, changing it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you should not need any other treatment for simple wounds.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then you should soak wool in good-quality oil or in fresh oil and place it around the edges of the wound between the ankles and under the armpits.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, for many times this happens, then cauterize it with black henbane and especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the intestine and formed a deep ulcer inside it.
And know that the one from the large intestine is of easier healing than that in the small intestines.
Based on the provided translation style and the context of medieval medical treatises, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
But if the discharge from the wound is cloth and you find it fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you also reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to the space and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that area with a bandage over the affected part, so that blood flow will come out, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
Then you should also cut that which is another ligament, and place two ends of the bandage hanging down from the affected area on either side of the wound, so that the attraction of the affected part will be relieved upon you and the casement of the cloth and the exit of the arm of the wound.
Remembering wounds when they occur in the intestines.
When there is a rupture in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some men, for I have seen this in one who was wounded in his belly with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become an old fistula, and thus he had no defecation or flatulence.  (Note: The translation assumes that "disrupcio" refers to a rupture or perforation, and "resteurada" means restored or repaired.)
The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And since I see that the affected area is already healed, I advise you to place your hand on the patient and discern if there will be an adverse event in their stomach; and do not perceive anyone by this means, but rather eat and drink according to your usual habits, and then enter the bath and perform your mentioned exercises.
And some experienced ones say that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied off in this manner: and that you take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants whose mouth is open over the two lips of the wound. Then, as it bites onto them, strengthen its mouth, cutting off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant near the first one, and continue doing this with ants, one after another, according to the size of the entire wound.
Then sew up the wound and bind it; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible to tie the intestine with fine thread made from the intestines of animals attached to it, since it is more in needle form; and that you take the end of this thread of intestine, which should be very thin, and then tie the end of it with thread of silk, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into needles and sew up that intestine with it, reducing it in the disruption.  Or, as some say: E ja diysero alcus que es melhor per la sanitat del malaute liar aquel budel am fiel de seda, per tal que·l fiel de seda sia mes fin e menos dissoluble que aquel de budel. And some say that it is better for the health of the patient to tie up that intestine with silk thread, so that the silk thread is thinner and less soluble than that of intestines.
"And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
"But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not a simple injury but rather a puncture, and it will not heal completely.
"About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
"Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes foul and old and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but persists over time and is not incised, then in whatever member it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it ulcer.
"And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, calloused growth with no pain and an indentation like the indentation of a bird's beak; and for this reason that ulcer is named 'rizatz,' which means 'beak.'
"And in some people the ulcer is wet, which persists over time; and very quickly the moisture is incised within a few hours. "And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and it is thin, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to let you know the treatment of a fistula that is made by hand through an operation.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; among them are those which reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or intestines, or the bladder, or some ribs, or some vertebrae of the spine, or some compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; among these are those which affect members similar to the principal ones.
And thus that among these fistulas, which follow this manner is one of the most difficult to cure illnesses, and it does not accept treatment, and there is labor and ignorance with it.
If any of the fistulas have a depth that does not reach these places as mentioned, and you expect and prepare for its treatment, and you wish to achieve knowledge of it, then take some iron or lead, and if the fistula follows a straight path, you will explore it with this.
But if the fistula is twisted, then explore it with a thin lead probe, because lead, due to its lightness of body, is easily bent and followed along the twists.
And if the fistula has many openings, it will not be possible for you to mark it with a probe.
Therefore, enema each opening with its own enema, because the moisture with which you enema it will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire very carefully according to what manner is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is far away or nearby, or if it is a fistula with many openings and is located on this, completely under your strength, with your skill, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be your pressure with your hand over the area, similar to the signs and causes related to the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true stability, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, distant from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I mention to you.
Then dry the fistula according to what was said before in its narrative, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has been born in the orifice of the flesh, or similar, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth, and according to the rule, then it is necessary to insert that into the flesh as much as possible, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this several times until the acute medicine has corroded everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that promote healthy tissue until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this, then you must cauterize the area as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then you should investigate that area and dry it out according to our recommendations, unless you find any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water that promotes the growth of flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and throws out pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely removed the corruption; therefore, you must uncover it further and make a thorough scraping and cleansing of it with the strongest tool at your disposal, and then restore it.
And so if it heals, then that is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not beneficial to treat it further but rather to leave it alone.
And if the bone is small or you are able to pull it out, then use fine forceps for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them and leave none behind with your strength.
However, if any humidity causes resistance or obstruction during the extraction and there is no fear of error, then carefully cut away the ligaments or flesh that are attached to them and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then place something over the wound to moisten it, and leave it until that area is filled with flesh and ligaments around those bones. Keep watch over the wound so that it does not heal too quickly and constrain the cut that you made during your operation.
Finally, if you fear that the flesh will adhere to the bone, place a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or any of the other green ointments on it. When those ligaments have dried up and the bones are separated from them, the swelling will subside and the pain will be relieved.
Based on the pattern you've provided and the sentence given, here's the translation:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"And I recommend that you have with you what is needed to assist a man in his illness, so that you may serve as an example and aid in your work.
"A young man, around thirty years old, experienced pain in his side, and from the parts within, a swelling developed on the inside of the body until the swelling reached the side, which is a large abscess, with no external cause.
"And then the condition persisted due to the doctors' mistakes until the abscess burst, and dark matter flowed out of him. His treatment was paused until his leg became ulcerated, and there were terrible wounds on him that constantly oozed pus and bodily fluids.
"And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, but none of them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
"And I saw his leg and the matter that flowed from those wounds in large amounts; and the man's body was completely rotten, and his color was yellow.
"And then I inserted a probe into one of those wounds, and the probe reached the bone.
And I immediately examined all the openings and found them to be connected from every part of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised into one of the openings, discovering a piece of bone, which I found to be rotten, already turned to dust and decayed; and I discovered that part of the thigh had become corrupt where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I separated and removed what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but rather the corruption which I cut out and removed, and I had already scraped it away.
And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I incised and discovered again on the bone according to the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I made an effort to perform the cure and restoration on him, but he was not restored.
And then I discovered on him again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little, particularly, and made every effort for his restoration, but he was not restored until I incised around a palm's width of him, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to make an incision in him, except for the arrangement of his weakness and the scarcity of his endurance and fear of death, because he faints at all times due to excessive evacuation.
And so he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard flesh; and his condition in his body has been properly arranged and his strength has returned to him; he has been converted into his natural state and neither walking nor any other cause has harmed him.
But if the bone is protruding from the previously treated area of the body, then you must cut it in this manner: and that is to take a strong ligament and bind it tightly around the tip of the protruding bone; and command someone to stretch it out; and place a thicker woolen ligature over the first ligature; and then tie it down over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity for pulling the skin apart, and you expose the flesh in the area where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And place a stick or board underneath the bone securely, because when you do this it is not permitted for the saw to cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear as it should to the touch, then force the incision again.
And if the bone is not prominent, before you join one part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at the edge of it, then peel back the skin from all sides completely; and then place a stick underneath, and then incise that of the first part where the corruption enters until the incision joins with the other part.
And let the incision be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but foolish.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should explore how the corruption appears to you, and scrape that away, and clean it according to each possible arrangement, and with each method straighten as best you can, when there are no veins or nerves obstructing you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.
Here's the line-by-line translation of your source sentence:
And I will list for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have as simple tools with which you will proceed to carry out your task, which you will practice on others. Form of saw
Form of another saw  (This phrase suggests that there might be different types or shapes of saws being referred to.)
Form of another large saw
Form of saw The head of this saw should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its teeth should be in the form of steel needles.
And it is not suitable except that with this [saw], the heads of the joints should be shaved when they are rotten, or the mouth [of the wound] is very wide.
Smaller form of razor
Broad form of razor
Another well-made saw: it should be made of hardwood with a more superior arch and the iron teeth sharp, and its handle should be decently made of wood. Shape of it  (The "it" refers to the saw mentioned in the previous sentence.)
The shape of a razor which has a concavity
The shape of another fine/delicate razor
This translates to: "Form of another curved extremity:
"Form of small razor resembling a tendon:
"Form of another, smaller incisor:
"Form of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
"Form of a saw that is suitable for cutting through the bones:
And its end is triangular with a sharp point.
"And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise all the instruments that we have mentioned for razors and incisors and saws.
For cutting extremities and sawing bones.
"The extremities can be amputated for intrinsic reasons or extrinsic ones, either because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment did not work, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is necessary that you cut off that member until where the corruption reaches, so that the patient escapes from death or great evil, which is a greater affliction of the member.
And the sign of that person to whom it occurs is that the member turns black until it seems as if fire has already burned it, or you can approach the blackness until the blackening reaches that member which affects him and spreads throughout his entire body; thus beware of the outcome for him.
Similarly, if the cause is the corruption by some poisonous creatures such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a weevil, and so on.
And if the corruption or infection is at the tip of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give the corruption space to enter into the hand.
Similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should cut off that part from the wrist downward, and do not give the corruption space to enter into the forearm of the arm.
And if it spreads to that [the forearm], then you should cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and goes around the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other treatment for this condition is futile.
And similarly, when corruption invades the foot, you should cut it into one of the knots (i.e., a joint).
And if there is pressure on the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot. But if it rises to the ankle, then you should cut the leg into the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is no hope for him, but rather he must be left to die.
And the way to cut off or amputate the limb is that you should bind a ligature above the part where you want to cut, and place another ligature on the spot; and the assistant extends a ligature below the parts, and the other assistant extends another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between the two ligatures until there is an opening wide enough that all the flesh is exposed; and then it should be cut or sawed off.
And it is necessary that cloth of linen be placed on all parts, so that the healthy place does not touch, and let the patient have a clean bandage and a cauterized wound.
But if you cause a flow of blood while operating, then you should cauterize the place lightly, or place some powder on it that restricts the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
And immediately bind the affected limb with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his foot, this very accident that I and you have discussed, which is because darkness occurred in his foot with burning that resembled the combustion of fire.
And that corruption first happened in his foot until it affected the entire foot.
And then that man prepared for himself the pus that came from the treatment of his foot with great vehemence due to the pain and burning he experienced, and he applied it to that foot up to the joint, and he healed it.
Long time ago the same corruption happened to him in the finger of his right hand.
And then he came to me, and I was obliged to expel that excess with the water that is placed on the hand of medicines, close to the cleansing of his body; and the excess did not go away and began to spread to another finger in the same hand.
And he asked me to apply the hand of him, and I did not want to do that hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and moreover I feared lest the application of his hand would kill him, because the power of the patient was weak.
And since he recovered from me, he returned to his land and it was reported to me that the man cut off his entire hand and was cured.
And I have included this narrative only to serve as an aid for what comes of this illness, and to be a sign by which it may be recognized and accordingly treated.
On the treatment of veins and the type of enema with medicine.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged to such an extent that it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is thin like fine cloth, and corruption has not yet reached there, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a vein, and not a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to such an extent that corruption reaches a certain member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment for it is that you cut off all of that skin, just as it has become twisted and, especially when it is thin and resembles cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And it is that you should consider the abdomen, and if it is swollen, and the arm that you have is of foul odor, then enema that one with Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey divided into parts, and they are put together in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
Sure, I'll give it a try! Here is the translation:
And then you should extract it with disregard; and do this for as many days until the wound is cleansed and the stench has been removed.
And in some cases, you enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of vinegar, put them in water; then collect it and enema the patient with it until you see that the wound has healed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then enema them with water and honey mixed together, and then enema them with wine and honey mixed together, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and notice that the wound has healed, then enema them with water that promotes the growth of flesh in them.
And it is that you take of the unguent "diaphonicon" and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you enema them with some medicines and other unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
And if the opening of the sinus is too narrow to receive the cannula of the clyster, then you should gradually enlarge it with an iron [tool], and place in it a clove wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is sufficiently enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together its lips with a stitch and leave in it the amount in which the clyster can enter without addition.
And if the opening of the arm through which the vein is raised to the upper parts is dry, then moisten it with the lowest amount of pus that is in it so that the vein can enter below, for when the vein is constricted by the narrowness of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible to moisten the sinus within the environment of the lowest amount of pus as you wish, then you should prepare the member with a preparation through which the vein can flow easily according to what seems suitable to you and that no cause of the vein is retained in it.
"But that which is on top of the opening of the vein, you must always pay attention to it so that something does not fall into it from the arm. "And in order for you to know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or not digested.
"And also consider the location of that vein: whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
"And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been poured over the opening of the vein already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then on the second day you must free it or unstick it, and when you free the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
"But if from the vein a rather long time has passed and no subtle fluid comes out, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and there are others who experience the opposite.
"And if from the vein many days have passed and the arm is undigested, then know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply drying medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they become dry like a plaster made from diaphanous wine, to which an excessive amount of egg has been added.
And the most important treatment is to take diachylon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it generously on the affected area, and afterwards bind it with a clean cloth, using that ointment.
And if there is no diachylon ointment, then take myrrh, aloe and sesame seeds, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey while it's on the fire. Then strain that through cloth and strengthen it over the wound; and line it with the honey you have cooked until it thickens, and sprinkle it over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes they are administered with longwort and lily roots (and it is lilies) and erysimum flour and centaury, and use these simples or compounds, grind them and sift them into a powder over the honey you have mixed; and use that.
And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the flesh, and make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with fistula cure, as said above.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Based on the given text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
And therefore, when you have that patient as we described in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to remove with an iron all the remaining superfluity from the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound appropriately, because cautery is very beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail has already been removed, and the edges of the nail are pressing into the flesh at the base, and they begin to puncture and lacerate that area, then it is necessary for you to place a thin ribbon under the edge of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push upwards, easily slice off that piece of flesh, and place corrosive medicines on what remains of the flesh until everything has been removed; and afterwards cure that patient with ointments until they are healed.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut out that part of the bone and extract it, because no time will pass in which a corrupted bone can be healed.
And if you see the corruption and decay spreading into the fingers, then you should cut off that finger at one of the joints, according to the best medical practice, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
"However, when something like this, which is born in the hands of some men, is very light in flesh, and very light in bones, or very light in fingernails.
"And some of them are born at the base of the joint, or it is their birthplace in certain knots of those. "However, that which is born in certain knots of the finger does not cause harm, but this one that is born in the joints is very harmful.
"And of those that are fleshy by nature, the incision should be light, and you should cut it at its root with a lancet.
"However, of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of its incision.
"However, in that which is born in the knots of the finger, you should cut the flesh at its beginning with a round incision to the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws for this purpose, and then cure it until it heals.
"However, the consolidation that occurs between their visible joints, either by nature of man born thus, or by consolidation from a wound, or by burning with fire, or by resemblance; then you should cut away that consolidation until the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets the infusion of rosemary oil so that they are not easily solidified, and separate among them or place a thin lead sheet between them until it is consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if there is a solidification in one of these places with the palm, then you dry that solidification according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
About the origin of veins, they are called varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted vessels filled with melancholic excesses that appear in the limbs of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially among travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
However, their cure with iron is done in two ways: one way is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out; the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The incision is done in this way: first, wrap the leg of the patient with hot water until the thick blood, which is foul from the leg, is resolved. Then strengthen the leg of the patient to the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide cut. And then draw out the black blood from the lower part of the leg upwards with your left hand, up and down, until you have extracted as much blood as you wish and as many times as is necessary to restore the patient's health.
And immediately bind it, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and inform the patient of this.
But the elevation of their [legs] is done in this manner: You who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then put it in a bath and soak the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell. Or if it is to be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not present, until the limb becomes numb.
And then dry the cord in the right side of the vein for drying on the thigh or at the back of it you should place the needle, or lower down you should place the heel.
And then open the cord with a hook and cut the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and its appearance should be like that which sees this asks for darkness.
And therefore as you draw [the blood] and from the cord you see that white strand, it shall be a cord.
And then you place that vein below until it is raised and removed from the cord, and suspend it with a hook to an empty receptacle.
And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' width, and then remove the cord from above the vein until it appears.
And then lift that and make another incision behind the ankle, and then extract it and lift it until it exits through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision above that.
And do this until you have extracted it from the highest or most superior incision of all, until it is entirely out; and then make an incision there.
And if it does not obey you in being extracted and lifted, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, and extract it, or insert a reed beneath it and turn your hand in all directions until it is dislodged. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift that much and it has come upon the patient because of that injury.
And when all of it has been dislodged, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and olive oil, both refined and unrefined, and tend to it until it is healed.
And if the intestine is twisted with twisting that is wrapped around its parts, and it does not follow the straight path as we have said, then you must make an incision along all of its twisted parts and in the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend it with hooks until you remove it entirely.
And be careful with your incision that you do not cut the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; and preserve your skill in this.
Shape of the instrument with which the intestine is cut:
It is not as sharp as the hooks nor does it have a pointed tip so that it does not injure the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there is some unnecessary thickness in it as we have said.
Of the extraction of the calf vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as Al-Andalus in Arabic land and in the hot and dry lands of India with little humidity, where there is neither grass nor trees.
And sometimes it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation is from putrefaction, which comes after the bowel movement, just like poisonous snakes and worms and scorpions and worms that generate between the bowels and the flesh.
And the sign of its onset is this: in the thigh, there is a vein that becomes severely inflamed; and then the place swells up; and then the vein begins to come out of that swelling, like a plant root.
And when its tip appears, then you should wrap around it a lead weight that weighs between one and two pounds. Tie it on and let the lead hang from the thigh.
And every time something comes out of it for any reason to the outside parts, wrap that in lead and tie it off. And if it is prolonged, then you should cut off a piece of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that one straight until it has come out, because if you cut it straight it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and rotting in the place and a bad ulcer.
"Therefore, it is necessary to treat it gently and remove it little by little until it is completely removed from the body, leaving nothing behind in the patient.
"And this vein can protrude in some men to the length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has come to my knowledge that one reached twenty palms.
"And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the reed into the wound and make a long incision into the body until everything in the matter has been evacuated. Then apply putrefactive ointments to the area for several days with medicines; afterward, treat it as you would an abscess.
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out through many openings, with each opening having its own branch.
"Therefore, treat it as we have said in the previous section and with the aforementioned remedies.
"Concerning the removal of worms that are generated under the skin, which is also known as 'bovine illness'.
"This illness is called in some places 'bovine illness' because it often happens to oxen, and a worm is formed, one of which is born between the skin and flesh, traveling through the whole body up and down, and its movement from limb to limb can be felt until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And his generation is by the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then it causes great weakness in him and enters and destroys the eye, and this requires much observation.
Therefore, when you want to cure this and extract it, it is not done unless you know its movement and appearance to the touch, and then you must hold firmly what is above it and what is below it with tightness and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery with fire over the area where it dwells, and the greatest fear is its corruption with which it corrupts the area as we have said.
But if you see that it has reached the head near the eye, then hold the eyelid with strong constriction, and then dry it out, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use purifying medicines to evacuate bad putrid humors from his body, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Based on the pattern and context from your provided translations, here's my best guess for the translation:
And I have already seen that one which I am about to describe to you. I was called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, I discovered a small inflammation in the vein of the arm. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflation moving as if it were a worm, ascending upwards, but more lightly than would be possible for a worm, as if it were live silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain moved to that location and settled in the muscle, and it remained there for an hour.
And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was turning throughout her entire body, as I saw; and I was amazed at the transformation of it and its speed from one limb to another. And I had seen this before in my own hands in that same manner, but I have never seen words which cause pain to be transformed from one limb to another. However, I did not see this with the hands as I did with the woman.  />
And I did not think that this was the case, but rather that it was because the woman was from the countryside, where bodies are dry and veins are visible, and in such cases this wind appears to be transformed by sensation.  />
And it is necessary that this treatment not be used on those who are delicate and have prominent veins.
And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, then do not approach him as we have said before. Instead, press firmly on that area and leave him slightly lifted until that trapped wind is expelled, and then cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat him by purging the body and using something that expels wind, and administer to him pills of bitter medicine and pills of syrup and similar things.
About the removal of arrows
Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, and solid ones; others have three prongs, and there are those with barbs, and those with shafts.
Here's my attempt at translating the given text:
And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
But the signs of an arrow wound to the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels as if it has struck a hard object, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and sweating, and fainting. Therefore, know that death approaches without delay.
And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: foamy blood exudes from the wound, and the veins near the neck swell up, and the patient's color changes, and a great deal of spirit is exhaled, and he seeks to draw in cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small ribs, and a great deal of bile is produced with violent pain and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles are not moving well.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then food of some kind will soon come out of the wound, undigested.
And if the arrow is lodged in the abdomen and stuck in him, if there is some opening of the wound, or of the cloth, or intestine which has been torn apart, and there is no hope for his recovery from the removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is flowing out, and some swelling occurs outside, and there is severe pain on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
But the other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their attachments, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, pelvis, thighs and similar parts of the limbs are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you about this concerning the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding the treatment you should apply.
The reason is that I once treated a man who had an arrow stuck in the tear duct of his eye, near the root of his nose. I extracted it from the other side, leaving the shaft of the arrow behind his ear, and he was cured, with no injury to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and only a small tip could be obtained from it, to which the shaft adhered, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no feathers.
And the Jew died, and it was not an unfortunate accident for him.
And another arrow was extracted from a Christian man, which had fallen into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow and it still had its feathers; and then I cut between two of its guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I skillfully removed it, and after that I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I thought that he would die from it; but then, after thirty days passed and none of his dispositions changed, I cut into the arrow and hooked onto it, and he was healed, and no unfortunate accident befell him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after seven years had passed, the arrow came out of its own accord.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly, and the wound was closed inside her, and it did not change its position, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound was closed and the arrow broken off, not finding much pain here, and similar to these (cases).
And (I) extracted the arrow from the king's chief man whose middle of the nose it had pierced and had already inclined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his care immediately after the arrow entered three days (later).
And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I explored it with a fine probe, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick below the right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I plastered the area with a plaster that had both attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area would swell so that the location of the arrow would appear to me, in order to dry over it.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And then I placed a sharp, corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I explored that area, and found the tip of the subtle arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and I passed time with it over the course of four months.
And since the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it, I kept them there without removing them. Not content with this, I did not cease to be subtle and ingenious about that matter in many ways until one day I succeeded in taking out the arrow using finely made forceps, as will be described later in this chapter. Then I treated the wound again.
And although some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient was cured entirely and did not suffer from any further ailment.
And I relate to you the qualities of extracting some arrows so that you may rule and understand that which I have not said, for the divisions of this art and its definitions are not comprehended by narrative alone, nor do these books comprehend them.
And wise practitioners compare the little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they discover a new operation and a new instrument for dealing with the causes that are external to the craft when this occurs.
And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or by the contrary action of the other parts.
And that which is thrown by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and expelled.
And if it does not obey an attempt to remove it in the hour when it was stuck, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are eased.
Similarly, if it is stuck in the bones and does not obey your attempts to remove it, then leave it for a few days and try to pull it out with attraction and moisture each day, and eventually it will be expelled.
And if it does not obey your attempts to remove it after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sight, then you should search for it with your hand, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are no bones, nerves or veins, then make an incision over the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if he has ears with which you can hold him, then cut the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the skill you can muster; and contrive upon this, that if you cannot remove the skin on the fracture of the ears and twisting them until they obey.
And when you perform the removal of the arrow from any place it is stuck, then use tweezers with your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and be careful with utmost caution that the arrow is not broken and that the removal is done skillfully and precisely from him and the arrow.
And if you cannot do this at that moment, then leave it for several days until the parts surrounding it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has become less painful. But if blood flow is present, then administer what we have said about treatment in the respective chapter.
And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer skill in every way possible in the removal of the arrow; and do this with gentleness, calmness, slowness, and steadiness as I have recommended to you.
E therefore you must arrange the arrow in such a way that the patient is according to the figure by which you should direct the shooting of the arrow into them, because it is more helpful. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are thrown by the contraries of the other side, or if you have already removed some part from them to the outside parts, or make the tip of the arrow gibbous by feeling the part above the cord, and sometimes it is raised; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and then throw it away, because it is made lightly to extinguish.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the arrow presses into the bone, and widen as you insert it, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then try again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you should remove it with it.
But if the shaft has fallen out and you wish to administer an impulse, then you introduce this, if it is blind, with a hollow instrument through which you can enter the concavity of the arrowhead at the back of the arrow and then remove it with it.
"But if the arrow is barbed, then you should push it in further with a strong instrument, because the arrow is eased by that.
"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh in which the venom is found, if possible, and afterwards treat it with whatever is appropriate.
"And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and remove the arrow, and afterwards sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
"The shape of tongs with which arrows are pulled out:
"Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with serrations so that they can grip the arrow and not let it go.
"And from these are made various instruments, large, few and small, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Certainly! Let's try translating that into English line by line:
"On phlebotomy of the veins.
"The veins of phlebotomy are such and such, of which there are sixteen in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, known as jugulars; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the corners of both eyes, called lacrimal; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are the veins known as algelic; and there are two veins under the tongue. "However, the veins that are bled in the arms are five. Of those, one is the cephalic, and it is called 'wild vine' by the people; another is the median cephalic vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; the people call this one 'the vein of the whole body'; the basilic vein is the one placed in the domestic part of the forearm, and it is called 'small vein,' which the common people call 'belly vein'; the vena funis of the arm, placed on the wrist, is the one that is bled; this is the one that appears prominently on the back of the hand. Also, the salvatella, which is the vein between the auricular finger and the little finger, consists of two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is behind the curvature of the back of the wild boar's thigh, and the second is the saphenous, and its place is on the inner side of the domestic pig's thigh, and the sciatic vein, and its place is on the outer side of the wild boar's thigh; and in the leg there are other similar veins.
The healing of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient cataracts and migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
And the way to bleed them is as I tell you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed on the back of the head in the place where both veins are with a wide cloth and good friction; then tightly tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that both [veins] and their places are near the ears in two prominent areas of the head; and you will look for it with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is a sign to proceed.
Then take the scalpel, and it is that which is sharp, and then you insert it under the vein until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the separated parts above, and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and make as much blood come out as you wish.
And then strengthen with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of this book, we discussed those (remedies) and their use in cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the one that is beneficial for bloodletting (phlebotomy) is ancient and effective against migraines, frequent headaches, and acute overflow of fluids in the eyes.
And the way to perform phlebotomy on these veins is as I have instructed you: constrict the patient's neck with one hand until both veins can be clearly felt and their pulse is evident under your finger; then proceed with caution.
Then raise the skin over the vein slightly with your index finger, and insert the lancet beneath it, lifting the vein upwards; then cut as you did with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your needs.
Then release the patient's bandage, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then cover it with a cloth and poultices, strengthening it firmly; leave it until it is healed.
Sure, here is a translation attempt of the given medieval medical text into English:
And therefore, the incision of phlebotomy in the frontal vein is appropriate for phlebotomy in ancient diseases of the face and for migraine, heat, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is as I will tell you; so it is that the patient should tighten his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, and this is its shape.
Place the prominent point at the top of the fleam on that vein and strike it with the handle or another similar object, allowing the blood to flow according to the desired amount; then release the puncture from the patient and tighten it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be sharp at its extremity like other phlebotomies, rather it should be blunt, and phlebotomize in this manner across the width because the bone is close to the surface and thin, so that the subtle phlebotomy would break on it.
But the incision of the two veins which are near the tear ducts at the corners of the eyes is for itchiness of the eyes due to heat and pus in the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my translation attempt for the given sentence:
It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure, likely a form of bloodletting or phlebotomy. Here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
And then let blood run as much as is necessary for you, place weights on those areas, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
But the bloodletting of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent cold, and for diseases of the face and migraine, especially when it is chronic.
And the way to perform bloodletting on him is for the patient to strengthen their neck and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long fleabite and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to the rule, because the vein does not appear here by touch, and because the blood begins to flow immediately. xspace
Ensure that you gradually remove your hand with the fleabite and let the blood run according to your need; then bind it for one night, because this vein heals quickly.
But the benefit of bloodletting from both veins is the constriction of air, and the onset of leprosy, and many diseases and rashes and bad ulcers, such as herpetic eruptions.
And the way to perform bloodletting from those veins is for the patient to strengthen both with a bandage under their chin; and let the practitioners be above the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a stool.
Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
And in the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins, you will find small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that you make the patient sit before you, strengthen his neck with a bandage, then turn up his lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each is identified by its blackness, and this is more so because in their surroundings are small black veins; and then you cut each one with a cutting incision.
But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then cut the larger of the two veins, or the most prominent one.
And do the same with the two veins that are above the lips.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for precaution against inflammations in the throat, for sore throat, and for mouth diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting those is to follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue; from one side of it comes a vein, and from the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to go too far in bleeding those, because beneath them are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the elbow are those which flow customarily in all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways, either by placing a thin lancet or one made of olive wood inclined to subtlety; or with a cutting lancet, and this is called alnessil, and this is its form:
it has the shape as you see, and it is suitable for opening full, apparent, large veins that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this enema is of lesser volume and more refined, and it is suitable for enema in subtle veins that contain subtle blood from the citrus fruit.
But the assistance for the enema in the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts blood from illnesses that are below the gullet and the neck, and from what touches the feet and the belly.
It is advisable for the person administering this enema to be very careful and cautious, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs or makes a mistake in the puncture of the enema, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so it is necessary not to perform this with a pointed enema, but rather to cut it first with a lancet.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary for you to leave that one and move to another, or seek some of its branches; or perform the enema at the end of the arm, because this is more evident; and proceed with a lancet enema in the same way as we have said.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And when you see, as you strengthen the ligament, swelling in the place that you marked with a needle, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and press your finger over it for a long time; and after remove your finger, and if the blood has been cut off, because usually it has been cut off, then strengthen the arm and let it be. ⇒ And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from an artery; therefore, cut and press your finger over the site for a long time. After removing your finger, if the bleeding has stopped (as it usually does), then strengthen the arm and leave it be.
And keep watch over the patient's urine, and be vigilant of him, and do not move him for some days until he is cured.
But if the blood does not stop, and you see that your presence is no longer necessary, then cut the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a compress of figs, and apply it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein's site with a stricture, descent with ligature and with powders until the next day.
And then, if his blood is cut, it is good; otherwise, cure him with the water that was mentioned before, remembering the place where the cutting flow of blood occurred.
And the abscission of his blood is difficult in many respects due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of tearing the arm.
But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous because it removes blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; for this reason it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful during his bloodletting because underneath that there is a nerve; and so if he presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, he will cause numbness, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and often he will not be completely cured. And this nerve appears in many sensations; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not visible, then it is necessary that you place the phlebotomy with which you bleed with a section of aluminum, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps cure headaches.
And it is specifically important to note that if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive-shaped or pear-shaped lancet; because they are the safest for all veins, as they do not affect the artery or nerve.
However, it is also important to note that swelling can occur in some people if they are not phlebotomized at the first site of percussion, but do not press on that swelling.
The first aspect of this is that you should know that phlebotomy is only administered for the preservation of health and with hope for the patient and caution against the onset of illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, dark and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in the spring and autumn, and in winter close to a meal, when signs of repletion appear.
And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or at the earliest in the morning after three hours have passed.
But when phlebotomy is administered, it should be done more according to convenience and necessity, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any season.
And it is fitting that children not be phlebotomized until they have reached fourteen years of age, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except between the fourth and seventh months, and old people who have already passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And if someone wishes to be phlebotomized by any means, it is fitting that they cleanse their intestines before the phlebotomy with a purging clyster, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the impurities of the intestines into the phlebotomy of the limbs, which are putrid and harmful to the main members.
And patients suffering from nausea or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until those conditions have been removed from them, nor should they be phlebotomized while recovering from illness or intoxication, nor those with dropsy. Moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided near colic, vomiting, abdominal mass, frequent sexual intercourse, heavy labor, fasting, vigils, and any other cause that weakens the strength of the body or soul.
"And then carefully consider the subtlety of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is suitable for the patient.
"And then enter a bath if there is no cause to prevent it, or exercise in some way so that the blood becomes thinned.
"And perform phlebotomy on the patient at the foot of the bed, around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
"And ensure that the patient's foot is protected on that day from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily incidents, such as labor, excessive fatigue, sex, and similar activities.
"And at the time of the patient's rest, have fragrant substances present in their use, as is customary among men for their pleasant scent and with balms and similar things according to the degree of possibility.
"And have the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the one on which the patient who must be bled is sitting.
"And then have the patient extend their arm, and have the phlebotomist rub it with their hand two or three times; and then tightly bind the wound with a strap and wrap it two times.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And before the incision, it is necessary that the person who needs to be phlebotomized rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and apparent to the touch.
And before the phlebotomist anoints his lancet with a little ancient oil properly, and places his index finger of the left hand on that vein, below the place where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein flees a little, and the pulsation is stopped; for it is from the veins that you find thus as if fugitive cords, which you should flee during phlebotomy, and of those are the ones full of airiness and when you place the lancet on that one it contracts under the lancet, and it is discovered to the phlebotomist; and the lancet does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is narrow.
Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be proficient and attentive to all these factors.
And then remove the lancet, but if the vein has been opened in one pass, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time at a nearby place, or on it with haste, if the spot is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient seems distressed, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, because this will draw out the inflammation strongly, nor should they enter the bath.
Then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then repeat the bloodletting in that spot according to correctness and adjust the opening a little, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, because for many men, you should make only a small incision.
But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat [the bloodletting] on it, because no cause excuses you from this; and place some of the oil's incision over it, because it relieves the body of blood. And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
Similarly, apply an oil incision to every bloodletting with which you should prohibit the body from losing too much blood, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, because blood is thinned and moved when it is thick.
"And if at the site of the phlebotomy a large abscess has formed, as it often happens, especially for those who have not been bled before or during the slight opening of the vein, then you should cut and place on the affected area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scraped, and hold it there for an hour until it dissolves.
"And you should ensure that the bloodletting is done from this vein or another nearby vein.
"And if there remains in the area for a few days some blackness or greenish color, do not be concerned; and if you wish, place on it some cause of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or some cause of mint juice, or something similar.
"And often these abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
"So place your hand on it, and if you find softness, press harder on it, for that swelling is dangerous; and then be careful to place on it some of the remedies mentioned earlier, because blood will flow heavily from the artery.
And make a plaster with water in which there is astringency, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color on the blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it bleed until it becomes red; and likewise if you see it is thick, then you let it bleed until it is thinned; and likewise if it is sharp, then you let it bleed until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one go, that the venipuncture of the vein be increased and the venipunctures be wide.
And in one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary that such a person bleed in several stages, and that the wound be narrow.
And the best way to administer venipuncture is for it to be a transverse incision, not a puncture.
And this method of venipuncture is safe from excessive bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venipuncture according to length and width.
And to which it is customary for fainting to occur, before bloodletting, you must care for that person by giving them a little bread soaked in honey or vinegar mixed with water; and extract from the patient's blood three or four times.
And if the cause is a cold complexion, before bloodletting, give them bread soaked in syrup of myrrh or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar; or in strongly scented syrup.
And if fainting occurs during bloodletting and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then give them water with meat and strongly scented syrup to drink; use aromatics like lavender, and anoint their feet with it.
And for the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And if one wants to open their arm and dissolve their blood gradually, it is appropriate for the person who is having bloodletting for excessive evacuation and whose strength is weak, that they extract blood little by little, according to the quantity of their strength on continuous days.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
"But if someone wants to draw blood from the body, either in the opposite direction of the affected area or towards it, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
"But in a body where there is much blood that has been cut and it becomes hot and causes fever, it is necessary to remove the blood from him at once, and a large quantity should be removed, and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while removing the blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
"And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, once the orifices of the vein have already closed and it has become difficult to draw blood, that you press very hard on it; rather, bend and stretch it gently, because this is too bad.
"Hold the linen in place until it is fleubotomized a second time; or remain with the heat of the flebotomist that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place on it a plaster of theriac alfarach, or of sagzenea, and press gently on it until the blood has been drawn out.
And if the vein is infected, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no other option, then do so on that same spot or in another vein of the opposite arm.
And the vein called "cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the median or basilic veins when they cannot be found or are hidden, as it is composed of those.
And the method of phlebotomy for him is that the patient immerse their hand in hot water until the skin turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then it should be tightly bound with a bandage of moderate strength; and then phlebotomize according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally or along its length.
And make an incision that is wide and phlebotomize with the instrument you use to bleed it, making a small cut at the wrist.
And if the flow of blood is inhibited, then immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your goal.
If you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in hot water, and instead, the body is bathed in hot water during wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because after it there is neither a pulsatile vein nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
And the technique for its phlebotomy is to strengthen the hand with a bandage or your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water until the vein is inflated and well visible; then perform the transverse phlebotomy; and if you cut that one completely, there will be no consequence.
Be careful not to end the phlebotomy with your hand, because after that are the exposed nerves of the aforementioned (veins).
Then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse your hand in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent further bleeding.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot immediately; and similarly, it is necessary for you to do this in every narrow branch.
However, the benefit of phlebotomy on the left side is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the spleen.
And do likewise in his phlebotomy as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for illnesses that are below the body, such as uterine diseases, retained menstruation, and skin and leg ulcers, both old and new, as well as similar conditions.
And the manner of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerse his foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then bind a ligature around the ankle; and where the vein called the dorsal venous network appears, from there branches spread out across the surface of the foot like tree roots.
Therefore, phlebotomize the thickest and lowest branch below the ankle towards the heel of the patient, for it is better and safer.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that lie beneath the surface of the foot. Perform your phlebotomy with the tool used to pierce, as if you were slicing through it.
And let the phlebotomies be visible.
But if the issuing of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in hot water and let the blood flow into it until it has been evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then try with the phlebotomy tool a little higher, for the place is healthy; and do not fear the evil, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is beneath the heel, below the junction of the wild part.
And the aid to his phlebotomy is at the level of the hip when it is for bloodletting.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters the bath, and quickly and strongly binds his calf from the hip down to the heel in four turns with a long, fine bandage, so that it does not appear except for this.
Here's the translation of the provided text:
Based on the context and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And be careful with the nerves, and make enough blood flow.
Then immediately release the constriction and place on the location of the phlebotomy a cloth and strengthen the area, because it heals quickly.
About cupping therapy and the qualities of using these [therapies].
Cups are made of horn, or glass, or glass.
And cupping therapy is done in two ways: one way is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other way is without scarification.
And this cupping therapy that is done without scarification is done in two ways, because it is either with fire or without fire.
And to the cups that are administered with scarification and bloodletting there are fourteen places on the body where cups are placed: one of which is alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of two parts of the neck together; and cups under the chin below the jawbone, below the mouth; and cups of two shoulders; and cups of alohoster, and they are on the end of the ribs; and cups of two fingers, and they are on two arms; and cups of two elbows; and cups of two hips.
Based on the pattern of the previous text, here's a line-by-line translation:
But if necessity requires inducing vomiting due to illness or pregnancy, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month, and whenever necessary.
Therefore, whenever any of these causes are present, especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, vomiting should be induced after two or three hours have passed since the day began.
And assistance for vomiting from the back of the neck is that when this causes heaviness in the head and it feels sunken into the eyes, but it would be better if this were an evacuation of the entire body.
And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
And it is not permitted to use one who has completed a cold, or who has catarrh, because that causes great harm to the patient.
And therefore it is not necessary to use those who are old and whose heads are afflicted with coldness.
But to the one on whom this is done, forgetfulness occurs; and because of this, it is necessary for you to command the bloodletter to place his hand lightly with the cupping glass at the endings, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But cupping on the back is in the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilic vein: and therefore you will cure asthma, and constriction of breath, and cleaving of the breathing instrument, and coughing, and fullness [of the chest].
And it is necessary that the cupping on the back be made lightly, for if it is placed too strongly, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
And cupping on the nape of the neck cures pains in the head, ophthalmia [eye disease], migraine, epilepsy, and toothaches; it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And it is important that you command the one who applies the cupping therapy not to press too hard with their hand during the scarification process, so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
And for cupping therapy on the chin, apply alcohol to the mouth, and in case of gum infection, and similar to other diseases that are in the mouth, they stand in the place of venesection from herehics that are in both lips.
But for cupping therapy done on both sides of the spine, apply caphatan, which is made by an excess of heat.
And for cupping therapy on the two parts inside the armpits, apply the juice from the venesection of three veins: the basilic, jugular, and cephalic veins. Because this attracts blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the person performing the cupping therapy not to proceed too deeply with scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh and only nerves and arteries remain.
And it is a type of cupping therapy with which the lower back is treated, and it is applied to hemorrhoids in the rectum and to anal ulcers below them.
"And it is necessary that you command the cupping practitioner to use a large cupping glass, and that it be made of clay, because the affected area requires strong suction; and let there be subtle incisions and scraping with a scraper.
"But cupping on the hips should be done with utmost precision, because they draw blood from all over the body, and this aggravates old pains in the thighs and legs, as well as in the bladder; it induces menstruation, causing both heat and coldness; and it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy on the temples, the neck, and the heels.
"However, they greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
"And as for cupping on the neck, the youthfulness of its benefits is close to the youthfulness of cupping on the hips.
"And the quality of the cupping placement is that you should place the cup at the beginning of the vein and slide it upwards with moderate suction, without prolonging the position of the cups; rather, place them lightly, leave them briefly, and allow the humors to come to the surface by natural means. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
And then you should make a scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and also consider the patient's condition.
Because that person who has tender skin and few pores, you should only make one scratch, no more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
And order the cupping practitioner to enlarge the scarification and prick a little bit more, and always suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should make two scratches, because in the first scratching the pathway for the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second one, to thoroughly extract the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dark, then make a third scratching so that it may be entirely extracted.
Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or just a small amount, one scratching is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scratch with many scratchings; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scratch with a deep scratching.
And in the process of scarification, the depth is only as much as the tendon.
And if the tendon is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentler, more open, and more resolving substances; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cinnamon; and in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of St. John's wort, or similar ones.
And if the swelling is large and harsh, then the oil should be of bitter orange, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
But if the person to be cupped has wide pores and soft skin, it is fitting that they be prohibited from oil, and it is fitting that for them the places of the cupping glasses before cupping be washed with rose water or strong vinegar, or water of cinnamon, or water of borage, and similar ones.
Here's a translation of the given sentence:
And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their openings with old wine, or with water of savory (which is marjoram), or with decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar herbs.
And it is necessary that the enema be administered before bathing; it is also necessary to administer it immediately after bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep close to where the enema was given.
What should be considered when bleeding a patient before administering an enema?
It is important to consider at the beginning: if the person giving the enema or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and has sharp blood and inflammation, then it is necessary for them to take cooling foods such as sorrel, vinegar, endive in sour wine, lettuce, purslane, cucumber, and similar things.  (This passage seems to be suggesting that the person administering the treatment should also follow a certain diet if they have specific humoral characteristics.)
And place their food as such: polenta, and lean bird meats, and foods cooked with vinegar, and similar things.
And for those whose temperament is dry, it is necessary that they drink syrup of almonds or syrup of sumac seeds and a fragrant wine mixture between white and red; and it should be advised to them to use a little food and drink, and place their food as polenta, cabbage, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of venesection and bloodletting, the drink should be greater than the food.
And it is necessary that in certain hours before venesection or bloodletting, some men be given theriac alpharac, or musk medicine, which is nutmeg, or mace, to comfort the main members and to make the blood more subtle; and they should not take that drink.
But the venesections that are without scarification should be those placed on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the joints' places, and the bladder of the groin, because these members cannot tolerate scarification upon them.
And it is not required for those (venesections) except to attract blood from a member, such as placing a venesection on the breast in illness of bloody flux from the nose; and this is used so that the viscous windiness of the member may be dissolved, such as placing (a venesection) on the abdomen and navel; for this rarefies the member, slakes it, and removes the pain because it resolves the windiness.
And it has been placed on the testicles when swelling or boils occur there, because by the virtue of attraction it quickly draws out the swelling and eradicates the boils from their place.
When it is placed over the liver and spleen, you should also puncture these areas to release any trapped wind or gas.
And these ventoses are administered with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with lukewarm water in cases of spleen illnesses.
And this is why the ventouse should be filled and be larger, which is either hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the ventouse administered with fire: it should have an opening the size of two fingers, as we have made it; and the amount of material should be half a palm's length; and it should be on the back of the patient, in the area where the ribs are, halfway up the back, and the hole should be small enough that only the tip of a needle can fit inside.
It should be made of red or yellow copper, with thick rims, smooth and polished so that it does not hurt the member on which it is placed.
And in the middle of it should be a transverse iron or steel rod, on which a candle with fire is placed.
And this ventouse should be much larger than the one we mentioned earlier; and the smaller ones should be used according to the illness and condition of the patient.
"And the cupping methods for children and the weak are different from those for young people and robust individuals.
"And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that you extend the cloth with decent firewood in front of a few wax candles, and place it in the middle of the cross-sectional beam of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
"And then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is on the hole we mentioned, until when we have the cupping glasses and do not need to remove the finger, steam will rise over that hole, at which point the cupping glass will immediately be removed.
"And then the cloth is ignited according to its manner, and it is repeated if needed.
"However, in the case of cupping for pleurisy, it is done with water, and there is no cross-sectional beam or hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
"And this is its shape: And this cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Certainly! Please provide the text you would like me to translate from your medieval medical treatise.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And the quality of using those which you have found bloodsuckers that are in the muddy waters of decay.
And first, let them be laid in the day and night in muddy water until they are faint, and that no cause remains in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; and then rub the limbs of the patient until they redden; and then place them on him.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if possible, suck the area with a cupping glass, it is more effective for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with warm water; and rub and squeeze it out.
And if the body's blood flow is prolonged near the application of leeches, and it sweats, then you dip a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
And if the blood is profuse, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or kermes and other similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad bean pods on the area, and let them lie there until the beans stick to the area and the bleeding stops.
And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting when it is possible to replace them.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or an injection should be placed in the spots until blood comes out; and it should be paused immediately, because those that feel any blood will quickly recover.
And when you want them to heal, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash over the wounds, and they will heal quickly.
Thus begins the prologue of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations.
Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laypeople boast about this chapter, those who at any time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the wise in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten this at any time but rather everything; and I have not added anything to what follows, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their meaning, until I extracted the knowledge from them.  /> And know, son, that in this chapter we will speak of five things: first, about the signs by which one can know if a bone is fractured or dislocated; second, how to reduce the broken or dislocated bone to its original place; third, how to keep it there until it is healed; fourth, what foods and drinks are good for the patient to take during this time; fifth, about the signs by which one can know if the bone has been restored to health.
And now I will direct my efforts towards experiments and studies for the remainder of my life.
I have already described everything that my knowledge and experience include in this chapter; and since I have shortened it for you and freed you from the task of elaboration, I have also shortened it at the end of all shortenings; and I have shown it at the end of explanations; and I have formed many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by adding explanations, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and collections concerning the essence of bone fractures, from which necessary preface is required before we begin to recall the members that are broken and diverse in each one. Therefore, in the preface of this chapter, we will state the main points of the argument; and we will discuss the chapters whose understanding at the beginning is necessary for the artists to be firmly established on the truth of those [chapters]; so that it may be you and others who are prompt in learning or knowing this noble art from you.
And so I say that when some fracture, dislocation, twist, or fall occurs, then you should begin with phlebotomy or bloodletting, or both together, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or it is a child to whom it happens, or an old person in decrepitude, or it is the time of very hot weather, or of very cold [weather].
This text seems to be discussing dietary restrictions or recommendations for a patient with joint pain caused by cold humors. Let's break it down:
And then return the patient to his original state or condition with which he is accustomed to.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency, such as dishes made from boiled wheat with water, rice, heads, hooves, stomachs, livers, fresh lungs, fatty meat similar to these, and with this regimen, the bone fracture heals more easily and better.
And know that broken bones in those who are in their first youth and in the elderly cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
But nevertheless nature adjusts and attaches over the broken bone from every side similar to glue in which there is a thick substance that adheres and strengthens it until it is completely conglutinated and united together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until any cause prevents it from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture in the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture in the bone of the head; and a fracture in the bone of the foot is different from a fracture in the bone of the hand; and similarly, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with the memory of every type of fracture, each one explained in its own separate chapter.
About the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are also diverse within themselves; for some fractures are curved, others straight; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the splinters and chips that protrude and do not protrude, just as it is done in a feather when it is prepared to be written, and there are fractures with bruising and tearing in the head, and there are small cracks.
Here is a translation of the given sentence into English:
"Mota senhal de fractura del os" translates to "A clear sign of bone fracture. "And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: there is a twist in it, and a swelling or prominence felt upon touch, and a cracking sound when you press on it with your hand.
"And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or cracking sound upon your touch, and the patient does not feel great pain when you shake the bone, then it is not a fracture here.
"However, it is possible that there is a twist or small fissure, therefore do not move the bone with your hand and apply pressure all over; then place on it of the medicines which are remembered at this moment which suit the place; and then bind it tightly for a precise compression.
"And know that when the place is curved and not split in two or another such thing happens to it that it becomes completely separated from its counterpart, then you should begin immediately with straightening it, but beware that an abscess forms on it.
"And if an abscess forms on it, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess subsides; and then drain it in any way you can with levity and skill.
"And know that the restoration and cauterization of it is easier than that of the bone in which such a fracture occurs.
"Then strengthen the one who will follow with the memory of him.
"But if there is a fracture in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb, whether it is the hand or foot; with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
"And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural form while the broken parts of the member are extended; then you should strive to return those additions with skill and in whatever manner you can put them back into their places.
"And be careful according to your strength that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion in the best way.
"And it is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and make it equal according to the amount of your skill.
"And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as many foolish doctors do who, with their improper operations, cause a painful abscess to form due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen this occur due to the operation of their unskilled hands.
And the quality of tightening the calm member is what I recommend; for you to know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in their form.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, similar to these, then the wrapping should be of fine, soft cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a strong and hard wrapping, because a strong wrapping connects the large member with equal strength from all sides, so that in it no stain enters.
And now begin, start your evacuation of excrement, place appropriate bandages on that for the break, over the area of that fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the member's size; and strengthen your hand slightly with the bandage.
And now come to that part which is superior to the place of the fracture, and strengthen more so that you do not break your bandage with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And now lengthen yourself with a wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the bandage little by little, until you take from the place a great length.
And now take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken place with wrapping, and now come to the wrappings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening it according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.
And now place between the wrappings of linen or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized, if there is any crookedness in it; and if not, do not place anything there for any reason.
And now place another bandage over it, and now equalize over these wrappings a moderate number of nails made immediately, if in the place there is no swelling or pustule, and then place on it something that draws out the pustule and removes the swelling; and leave it for some days; and then strengthen over it with nails. 》
And let the stilts of the main part be made of reeds, well-formed and woven together; or they may be made of pine wood; or from palm branches. And let each stilt be as wide as this form and this figure:
However, the stilt that is placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the other stilts, and the length of the stilt should correspond to the size of the limb in magnitude and smallness; then strengthen the stilts with another bandage according to your first binding method; and then tie it on top with a proper ligature as we have said about binding, and let your binding be closer to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less strict the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some foolish people who put their threads of twisted rope, it is a great mistake, because when the binding becomes equal.
Similarly, very fine threads are not suitable because you will not achieve with them what you want in the binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stilt and stilt.
And if the patient is affected by the ends of the stars near the constriction in those places, then place underneath them a piece of wool or flannel until it does not cause harm to him.
Sometimes a fracture is with a wound, and there occurs a rupture in the tendon, and I will come to remember that in the chapter according to specificity.
And know that not every broken member is immediately tightened with stars on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, you should not place stars on it except after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of avoiding an abscess carefully.
And this is the manner of plasters with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of plaster as an overview for restoring fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and it is that you take the powder from the mill, which is the marrow of the flour that sticks to the sides of the millstone in the mill walls.
And prepare it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture of it neither too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Here's the translation for your provided text:
All should be crushed in a mortar with great effort, and they should be sieved, and they should be mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Method for making a plaster for dislocated joints and separated bones, when pain occurs in those areas and in tears or breaks: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and cypress oil, then place it on the affected area.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but rather of preventing pus and relieving pain.
Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig tree and leaves of wild poppy, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of quick plaster for the restoration of a fractured bone and when you want to resolve the remaining pus: take roots of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and pea flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the limb is not cut.
But if it is cut, then mix it with water of moist coriander or water and use it.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into parts and translate it step by step:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
"But in Gaul it has been seen that they are placed on the broken member before its restoration and for the causes of which there is a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, ginger, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
"Manner of making a plaster for wounds and pain: take half a measure of chickpeas, the same amount of human hair shavings or goose feathers, and of flax, and salt, all divided equally; they should be ground, sifted, and cooked to make a plaster.
"But the quantity of which it is necessary that the plaster remains adhered and then be removed depends on whether there has been pain or swelling or if the bone is broken and displaced from its place; in this case, you should not remove the plaster for many days. "And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you must immediately remove or loosen that [plaster], and take it off from him.
"And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with it wash the area until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it for a night until you are sure that the abscess is cautious, and the inflammation of the member subsides, and its pain is removed.
And then apply a thin and small plaster carefully, ensuring that the area is clean, and use a small amount of liquid to moisten it for healing.
And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the symptoms have completely disappeared, and you no longer need plasters and restrictions, then apply a similar treatment as you did at the beginning.
And if nothing happens to the limb from any of the causes mentioned earlier, then do not remove it before three or four days, sometimes even five or seven; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, depending on how the member's loosening appears, as we have said, until the fracture heals and the flesh coagulates over it.
Then tighten the restriction more than your first one, and adjust it according to the patient's condition, as you were previously instructed.
However, if you see that the area of the fracture is dried and more atrophied than necessary, know that nutrition should not reach it; therefore, always soak it with lukewarm water before removing it; and let this be done every three days; ease the restriction a little, and by this process, the nutrients will flow into the member, and it will heal more easily.
Based on the pattern you've provided and the similarities between the given text and Latin, Spanish, Italian, and French, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
And I have not seen anyone do this, which is why it is more reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter two: On fractures occurring in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are varied, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by a blow with a rod, and the blow breaks all the bone into pieces, which then fall to the ground just like this happens in a log, and because of this, this type is called comminuted. Or the rod cuts off part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh without penetrating completely; and this type of fracture is called simple greenstick fracture.
The wound of these two fractures is either large or small, and the fracture is either crushed or torn. And the cause of it is a blow with a hammer or falling on a stone, and so forth.
And this fracture can either be penetrating, approaching the skin beneath the bone; or it can be in the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either large or small.
And there is another type of fracture that occurs within the bone, in the fineness of the hair-like structures, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
This text appears to describe a bone fracture caused by either a fall or the impact of something hard like a stone, which results in a piece of the bone breaking off and moving into the surrounding tissues. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And this is especially done in the bodies of small children, such as infants' heads.
And for all these kinds of fractures, pieces are used just like separate stars. And I will come with a reminder of all this in its place.
And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by inspection and by testing their tension and removal of decayed flesh from them.
And the greenstick fracture is recognized because it is exposed on the bone, and it is washed, and bandaged over it with tension, because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify clearly fear, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of consciousness, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, excretion of urine, and redness of the eyes, and similar to these in the major dispositions, without doubt it will not heal.
And if you see non-serious accidents, then you hope for health; in that case, you begin the treatment of him.
The reason for this is that if the patient comes to you at the beginning of the illness as he was ill and this happens in the winter days, then you should study the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary to remove the bone in front of the seventh day, having that which is under the bone be corrupted by the fat, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the fat covering the brain, and it is with small broken pieces and dust, then it is necessary to cut the crushed and ground piece, as I will tell you.
And it is that you shave the patient's head, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you according to the figure of the wound, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, flow of blood or pus, then you should place a compress on it with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and olive oil, and make the wound rest until the pus settles, and you are sure of the bleeding; and then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a narrow chisel like this, and this is its shape: And then administer another chisel of this type, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its shape:
And then administer more of the disinfectant after than the second [application].
And it is fitting that you have a variety of disinfectants, some of which are thicker than others; and some are shorter than the others and are at the end in terms of sharpness, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them easily by striking on the disinfectants to ensure that the head does not touch and harm it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to bore through it with a drill before administering the disinfectants with the probes, which are called non-penetrating probes.
And they are not called this way only because those do not reach the end of the bone to where it is appropriate, but rather because the probe has a round tip or edge at its end which resembles a small sharp margin or circle, preventing it from being submerged and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these probes, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that they are all present in all the bones of the brain with sharp ends, and their length and breadth should correspond to the thickness of those bones.
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
And then make an incision with a scalpel between each bone in the joint, making it as delicate and precise as possible. Continue this process until you have removed all of the bones or until some other cause requires you to use instruments such as tweezers and fine forceps, which you should have prepared for this purpose.
And it is important that you take care to ensure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the skull.
And once you have removed the bone and it is connected to the skull, and you have separated it, use a rasping instrument similar to a scalpel but thinner and more delicate than other scalpels to smooth out the rough edges of the bone.
And if there are any small fragments of bone left, take them out easily with the appropriate instrument you have on hand; then proceed to treat the wound with linen and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another way to perform the operation is light and far from fear, which they call Gaul's cut and praise it greatly; and here are his words: "It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most intense and apparent. Once you have exposed that part and placed underneath it the tip of a long, thin, and delicate scalpel, like this one:
Here's my attempt at translating the provided sentence:
And then you should strike the incision of a part with a small hammer until all the bones are cut through easily, as it has been revolved (described or explained before). Make sure that no accident happens to the fatty layer, for which you might be afraid in any way. And if the doctor is the most foolish and ignorant person among all men; certainly, and if he is asleep.
And if there remains any connected cause in the bones of the fatty layer in some bone places, he should cut that from him with the pointed end of the scalpel, and remove it with ease, for it is removed from him without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the fatty layer, and what is cut off or taken away from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain, then it is necessary to shave away that roughness and remove those splinters with very fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can use them in all places where they are most convenient and most appropriate for that operation on the broken bone and its shape.
And you should use in your razor the one with which you first shave the bone, and then use progressively finer ones until you reach the finest of all.
In any of the other small, superficial, or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what was lost for its correction.
And this is why it cannot be cured by everyone who has studied in that art. And we will discuss what we have written about large fractures.
And if the skin is torn when you extract the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place that on the opening of the wound; then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in vinegar and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and press as lightly as possible on it, so as not to harm the patient; then apply plaster, but do not tighten it except for the size of the wound only.
And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess is cautious; then unbind it and then administer medicines that cause dryness, such as linseed oil and powder of lentils and of sesame seeds, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines a powder which should be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer in him all medicine whose property is such that it cleanses and does not cause irritation.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there should be no ignorance of ointment or anything else on it; nor allow virulence to increase within him; for when it is placed on the thin layer of skin, it corrupts and poisons that, and causes a malignant illness to come upon the patient.
And it occurs in the cavity of the skull, especially when the bone is exposed and the care is neglected, and there is darkness on its surface; therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, know that it is fatal without any doubt.
And if darkness does not occur due to the medicine placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that darkness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the cavity; and then care for it with the appropriate healing substances until it is healed.
"Capitol" in medieval texts typically refers to a chapter or section of a treatise. So, based on your previous translation, "Capitol .iii." likely means:
"On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
"Know that the nose is not broken but rather split into two superior parts simultaneously, or one of those parts may be slightly dislocated, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but rather only bruised and twisted and curved.
"But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert your finger into his nose and close the fracture from within with your index finger, and push outward with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. "And this should be done by you carefully, and ensure that you do not cause pain to the patient during your operation.
"And if the fracture is in the more superior part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be equalized with the tip of a reed that has been slightly enlarged.
"And if the fracture is in both parts, then you will proceed in the same manner.
"And be sure to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach it on the seventh or tenth day after the swelling has subsided.
And immediately insert into the tip of the nose a cloth wick of linen, if the break is in one part, or place two wicks, if the break is in two parts, and let it be in the larger wick of such quantity that it fills the nostril hole.
And some of the old healers say that the wicks should be wrapped in linen and changed every day, but I have not seen this myself; it is better for the wick to be wrapped in egg white combined with powdered myrrh; and then let the wick rest until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it is necessary to insert into the nose, in place of a wick, a small sponge wrapped in linen cloth; and let this be done if the break of the nose is very severe and if the patient is not able to breathe.
And for this reason it is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do wicks.
And if another time a hot abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Here's the line-by-line translation of your sentence:
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure that with hot compresses and administer lead catheters until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw has been broken and the break is not due to injury, look then if the break is only on the outside and not broken in two and bent at the inside parts, then its diagnosis is easy.
And therefore, if the break is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the break is in the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that push the swelling of the fracture inside towards the outside parts with your other hand from the outside of the bone; with that you can straighten it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer an extension of both parts according to straightness until their union is possible.
And if there is a disruption of the teeth due to shock, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a double layer of cloth over it, and place over that a large, well-made bandage or a sole of leather equal to the length of the jaw; and then bind it above according to how you are accustomed to binding it and as is suitable for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and give him sparse meals.
And if you think the shape has already been altered in any way, then wait and remove it on the third day; and then correct that which is altered from him and plaster it with powder of mastic, egg white, or cumin flour, after you have removed the wax from him, and place wool over the plaster.
And when the plaster is thus attached and adjusted to him, and the bone’s position has not been altered, leave it in place until he is healed and strengthened, for many times this fracture becomes strong within three weeks.
And if it so happens that an abscess forms, then administer what has been said many times before in his sedation until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them from the instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a fleam according to your need.
And after you have removed those splinters and nothing remains from them, then you should enlarge the opening of the wound if it is large; but if not, place one of the appropriate plasters on it that heals and seals it until it is healed.
Chapter 5
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Often, the collarbone is broken from a fall in front, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, separated, or split into two parts without splinters; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens that there are splinters in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the break is with a wound.
And the operation for this, when the fracture is without a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one supports and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck toward the injured area.
And then you should bring the fracture together with your fingers until it is properly aligned, without any bumps or hollows.
And if you need more extension, then place a pillow or woolen cloth under the patient's head, with its size according to your necessity; stretch and raise the neck support (furcula) and shorten the pillow with your hand until it fits the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot move the end of the neck support to the outer sides due to it being close to the chest, then the patient should be laid back on their head, and place a medium-sized cushion on their chest muscles.
And have the assistant press on the patient's chest muscles towards the sides until the neck bone is lifted up to its original position in the chest, then you can straighten the fracture and align it with your hands.
But if you feel sharp edges or splinters of the neck bone and they are bothersome, then it is necessary to cut into that area and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should ingeniously make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the neck bone the instrument used to saw; and this instrument can be made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
And it is similar to the cuirass which this is the cavity; and let its length be according to what you need from it, whether it is for a large or small bone.
But let its length be suitable for the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end is wide while the other is narrow.
And if the wound you have cut when extracting the arrow from the bone is wide, and you are sure that there will be no abscess, then you sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the wound is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages according to the size of the cut of the wound.
And if an abscess forms, then insert a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil and wine into it, and place it on top.
And also, ensure that the splint is not too tight over the broken bones; therefore, it is necessary for you to check the patient each day, and when the bandage becomes softened or you see the splint starting to shift, then you should correct this and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the patient's head on their neck, and under their chin place a small cushion during the night, so that with this the ligaments of the throat are lifted from the back, and thus the fracture of the furcula is also elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or tie the patient's arm to their neck.
And do not untie the bandage unless you see pus or an abscess in the place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen swelling on it, and adjust in the constriction and restore that, and leave until the fracture of the furcula is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in a month's time of that.
Chapter VI
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Based on the pattern and context of the previous translations, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Based on the given context and language patterns, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
If the blade is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with wax, and then raise the blade to make it even.
And then strengthen it from above with a long bandage, bound tightly and firmly so that the blade is not moved from its place.
And check the bandage every day; and if it is loosened, bind it again and strengthen and straighten the blade if it has moved from its place.
And keep the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And therefore, when this number of days has passed, then you should remove the bandage, and know that it is safe, because this is about bones, whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if it concerns the place of the bone that presses and causes pain, then you should cut open that area, remove it, and act as we said in the case of a splinter or abscess that might occur here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a broken foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of it, and this delays healing; but the ends of it move easily and are separated and shattered.
And of the accidents that occur when its middle part is broken, it causes a decline in internal functions and great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; then press the muscles together, and adjust the ribs with the hands of two assistants, and be skilled in the operation and in the equalization according to all possible manners and what is convenient for this, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
Then place on the patient plaster and cloth, and on top of that a thin board made of willow or hazel or something similar in lightness; after wrapping it in linen, be careful to bind it over the broken bone so that it is not moved; and go with the bandage according to the roundness of the back several times, and strengthen that with decent tightness; and always consider the bandage, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it again.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large places such as the back; and at the ends of their division towards the front, this condition does not happen unless it is due to the fact that they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling; you should examine it with your hands.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that you enclose the fracture with your hands according to the most possible manner, until it is enclosed as needed. Then apply and strengthen the broken bones with a splint, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside parts, then there will be very intense pain and puncturing for the patient, similar to the puncturing that occurs in pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood will occur; and this is difficult to cure. ️‍⚕️
And the ancients have dealt with it in a very ingenious way.
And of this they said: it is necessary to place food on the patient that causes flatulence and bloating, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
It seems like you're trying to translate a text that appears to be medieval medical advice written in an old Romance language. Here’s a line-by-line attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
And some of them say that it should be placed on the bladder and then sucked with force; this seems logical, but nevertheless it is feared that the bladder will draw the excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool already soaked in hot oil, and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, ensuring that the bandage wraps around evenly; then proceed to treat the patient with a pleurisy diet and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe pain that they cannot endure, and the teeth puncture the membrane, fear for the patient. Then it is necessary to cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place a tool over it that preserves the integrity of the tissue (as mentioned before), so as to easily cut through the bone and extract it.
And then we should close the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then you should cut and press poultices soaked in hot oil over the area, and treat the patient with water that is appropriate for the internal abscess.
And let him be laid back on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter .ix.
On the restoration of a broken vertebra of the spine and the neck.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and later it extends to their cartilage, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: for if you see their hands are already softened and numb and dead, and they cannot move those nor extend them nor strengthen them, and when you press those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain there, then you should know that it is not healed, and in this case the patient will certainly die.
And if they move those and feel constriction with your fingers or a needle prick, then you should know that the bone of the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the same in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the patient's feet.
Then if you see that they are also softened and the same thing happens to them as happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he has urination and defecation without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work on his treatment.
If no cause of these [ailments] occurs, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce toward the abscess with a heated iron and place over the swollen spine some oil or a mixture of oil and garlic; place this on [the patient] several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
Then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the painful side until he is healed.
And if there is a fracture of the tibia or any other cause that has already separated from it, then it is necessary to place [the patient] on his back and pull out that bone; and then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment until it is healed.
But if the bone is broken at the back of the heel, and it is the end of the shinbone, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as evenly as possible; and then place a plaster and splint on [the patient], if you need them, and then strengthen that.
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts to understand its meaning better:
"Capitol .x." translates to "Chapter 10.
"De restauracio de la ancha" translates to "On the restoration of the vein.
"Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura." translates to "The bones of the hips are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture in them is only a communication at their extremities and they are inserted in length and decline towards the interior parts; and it happens that the patient experiences pain in the place and punctuation, and the thigh becomes numb when it breaks.
"E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu." translates to "And its restoration is that you place your hand over the surface that is above the fracture, which is its shape.
"E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural." translates to "And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should reduce it according to what appears to you by making an equal reduction so that the surface is similar to its natural shape.
"Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura." translates to "But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the interior parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are ready for the restoration of that fracture. And therefore, when you have bandaged it, place a plaster on the patient, and then place a wooden or cane splint over it, and bind it tightly so that you do not fear fracture or displacement of the splint.
And bandage the cavity with water so that it is filled until it reaches a tight fit according to its size, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
However, if a cold abscess forms, then stop the extension of it and its healing until the cold abscess is sedated, and place water over it as described above; and then return to the healing of the patient, and bind it as necessary.
And if the bones are shattered or splintered, then you should remove them.
Chapter XI
On the healing of a broken toe
The toe is that which is between the heel and the ball of the foot.
And if it is broken, then the healing of it is done in one of two ways. One way is for you to take a thin piece of wood of medium thickness according to this form:
And there should be ligaments tied at both ends, and then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
And follow the patient onto a seat; and then throw their broken arm over the pole until it reaches its middle, where the curve of the pole is attached.
And then suspend the patient from that for some serious reason, or let the servant extend him on the sides; and then let the doctor place the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
Another way is for the patient to be placed on his back and the hand of his neck tied up; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the feet below him; and each of them extends to their side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen on the fracture with a bandage and on that with another bandage, and each of the two servants extends to their two sides.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary that half of the bandage be placed on the little finger and the other below the fracture by the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary that the bandage be placed on that place and on that elbow.
Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
If an abscess occurs, leave the constriction for seven days, and place over it a wool cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess softens, then you can drain it.
And the manner of strengthening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a bandage of clean cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and keep your open hand on its muscles.
And place the cloth and strengthen the arm over the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless you are prevented from doing so by any cause of the broken bone.
Then use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all around.
And then strengthen the splints with the constriction that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction on the place of the fracture should be narrower. And as the fracture is longer, let the constriction be less.
Based on the context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
And if you fear a pus-filled abscess (aposteme), then leave the stricture and the stitches in place for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days to prevent swelling or inflammation in that area; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of stricture; and therefore, adjust everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not release the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place on the helper a cushion full of wool equally, and at all times of the night or day, make sure that the shape of the broken member is not altered or that the bandage is softened; therefore, adjust everything with your skill.
And provide the patient's food according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until they start strengthening; and then it is necessary to make their food thicker.
Because it is customary for the helper and the patient's leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be released and a bath should be administered, and the area should be treated with ointments that heal it.
And if the fracture is recent, do not remove the bandages and splints until after one day or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the two ulnae; one of them is small and is called the little finger, and the other is large and is placed below the small bone on the lower side.
And it often happens that only the larger ulna is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when it is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ulna above, it is fitting for the doctor to make a small extension with ease until it is equalized.
But if the larger ulna is broken, then he should make a more vigorous extension.
And if both needles are held together at the same time, then you should press harder on the needle holder.
And you should position the patient's hand in such a way that their arm and hand are extended on a cushion, with the wrist bent upwards, as with all the other positions mentioned before, and the auricular part should be lower than the others, and the patient should be sitting on a low chair.
And there should be a cushion in front of him at the appropriate height for him, so that the patient does not have to work or exert themselves.
And then one of the assistants should extend the arm from the wrist down with their own hand or with a bandage, and another assistant should do the same above.
And then the doctor should envelop the bone until it is reduced in the best possible shape.
And if there are splinters in the bone, then you should carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
And if a splinter appears that punctures the tendon and you do not hope for its reduction, then you should cut it off and remove it according to the manner we mentioned above.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already addressed that in a separate chapter; therefore, take care of it accordingly.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then take a cloth and make it into a bandage with oil and white wax, ensuring it is between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a thin tightness until the abscess subsides; then remove the bandage and apply a prepared poultice made from powdered chalk and egg whites, and afterward apply hot stones. And let the stone that is placed on that fracture be the hottest and strongest.
And know that the number of stones for the arm is as follows in the major treatments: whether the fracture is in one joint or in two joints together.
Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture as strongly and as intensely as possible. And when the bandage extends to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, moisten the bandage a little more according to what is mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are tightened should be made of linen, being precisely between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the ligament for about ten days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as pressure on the affected member, then it is necessary to immerse the member in hot water until the pressure ceases.
And let the member not be constricted until it rests, and then return the constriction.
And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has moved back into place, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider also if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of constriction, for then it is necessary to soften that a little and let it be for some days until the nourishment reaches that place, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release him until about twenty days or around that time.
And then the patient's hand should be suspended by his own skill of agitating movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-two days, or it is quickly healed in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the patient's constitution and the skill of the physician.
"Chapter XIII.
"On the restoration of a finger fracture and related conditions.
"Know that in the fingers of the hand and the toes of the feet, it is customary for a break to occur, and it does not happen except when they are struck with some force.
"And when a break or injury occurs in the hand, it is necessary for the patient to be seated and placed facing him, centering his gaze on what he sees equally, and then place his injured hand on an extended surface.
"Then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should bandage them together until they are well joined with a good bond.
"And at this point it is necessary to place a plaster and cloth on it, so that a post-operative abscess does not occur; then place steel on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
"However, if the fracture is in the part closest to the palm, and it goes through the belly of the palm, then make something similar to a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold it with his broken palm; it should be bound tightly with long cloth.
"And let the steel be covered in leather wrapped in cloth, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and bind it as necessary.
If the fracture is in the outer part of the hand, then you should place a steel plate on top and another steel plate underneath in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned at the wrist between these ligaments.
And if there is a fracture in any of the bones mentioned above, then if it is a toe, wrap it as needed and strengthen it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight plate on it, so that the fracture is raised and not aggravated.
However, if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be wrapped and bandaged with the same finger; or all of them can be bandaged together continuously, which is better; or place a small plate on top, as we have said for the toe.
And consider, in your treatment and then this one, the disposition of a cautious abscess — with your operation — with what is needed when any of these causes occur, as stated in his account.
Chapter XIV.
"On the healing of a broken bone in the hip.
"The bones of the hips are often broken and perceived by touch, according to their conversion into the anterior partition and the superior part.
"And its healing is done by tightening a bandage over the break and another bandage under the break, while the patient lies face down on their stomach.
"And then the attendant extends all of the bandage to its partition according to quality, when the break is in the middle of the bone.
"But if it is at the hip joint, then let the bandage be close to the groin towards the thigh, so that its extension may enter there, and another bandage under the break.
"And similarly, if the break is at the groin, then let the bandage be made close to the groin, and its extension towards the back parts.
"And then the physician aligns the bone with both of his hands until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is united by a good union; then it is necessary to place a plaster and stricture, lest an abscess occur in the limb. "But if it occurs in the patient an abscess, then you leave that for some days until the abscess has ripened and come to a head, and then you return to your treatment.
"The stricture of the patient should be done as follows: you must wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, removing excess; then wrap the thigh until it reaches the ankle and the root of the groin.
"And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the bone in the divided parts, and let the ends of the needle emerge from the higher part of the two parts, then revolve on the thigh and leg what is left over from the bandage.
"And then place on the thigh in the spot of that fracture thistles, and place one of those thistles on the bone of the leg.
"And then fill the empty spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the stricture is tightened.
"And then begin with a strong binding in the middle over the spot of the fracture with three or four turns, and the more you approach the spot of the fracture, your binding should be smaller, lighter, and moister.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then release the bandage from that area, so that it does not cause corrosion, aposteme, inflammation or similar conditions on the member; and if any of these conditions occur, then count yourself with an amputation of it, and correct whatever happens as closely as possible, as we have said many times.
But if the pressure is on the bone itself, then you should remove that (pressure) as much as possible; and if not, apply a compress to it and leave it there, and treat with whatever is remembered from before until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things being adjusted to it, as we have said in the arm and in the hand.
But nevertheless, in its restoration done in this way, the patient does not experience limping; and if it is restored alone or if the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one who has always limped continues to do so.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitulo XV (Chapter XV)
On restoring the dislocated hip joint.
Know that the dislocation of the hip joint often happens gradually, but it can also occur suddenly.
But if it is a dislocation, then it is only a fracture or crack in its parts, and this is either with pain or without pain, and everything depends on the feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts should be made equal with those mentioned until it is joined and united as much as possible by equality, facility, and craftsmanship.
Then place a plaster and place it on that round bone, if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage as appropriate.
And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as caution with inflammation and similar things, so that nothing happens to it by accident until it is healed.
Capítulo XVI (Chapter XVI)
On restoring the dislocated thigh bone.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula. ️
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if two bones are broken together, then the leg is reduced to parts.
And if the bone is broken more finely, then the leg is reduced to the front parts.
And if the bone is broken thicker, you will find it below, and this is one of those cases that are not familiar to you.
Then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligament tying according to the same principle.
However, it is necessary, if the leg fracture is jagged and has many splinters, that the extension be less and lighter, and relieve with your skill.
And if there is any occasion to operate on the arm due to a similar cause, and when you have aligned the splinters and completed the entire operation, then take wooden sticks that are placed below the cushions that are placed under the sole, and they are made of palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not being too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the arm, and insert them from within outwards.
Then wrap each in a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the broken part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them be from within outwards to the lowest part of the foot.
And then you place the two splints in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and it remains stable.
And then a splint made of wood is administered according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed on it so that it retains its stability.
And it is particularly important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when there is significant injury present.
And then you should observe the leg daily and study it closely for any changes, ensuring that there is no pus or swelling or other similar issues; if such an issue arises, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not fracture entirely; rather, the bones of the foot sometimes fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they only suffer bruising in most cases.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and they find themselves raised above each other, then instruct the patient to place their foot on the ground as if they were walking.
Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
And then place a plaster and cloth on top of it, and place under the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen it by extending the foot, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other necessary materials.
And when three or four days have passed, then you should remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are either swollen, or bent, or dislocated, and the treatment for these is as follows:
However, if some bones are bent, then you should restore those and swell those as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint on the bent toe according to its length and slightly wider than it; and then under the foot the previously mentioned board, and strengthen it with appropriate traction.
However, if that which is bent in the bones are two or three or more, then you should place on each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth; and strengthen the board at the sole of the foot, with one end of the board under the arch of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is advisable for you to remember that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned in other accidents that we have discussed; and be prepared for any accident with what is necessary.
### Chapter XVIII
### Of the Fracture of the Pelvis of a Woman and the Bones of the Penis and Testicles of a Man
### When the woman's pelvis is broken, then make her sit in a chair that has been lowered, and next incline her a little to one side of her back, and let someone hold her from behind.
### Then the midwife should fill the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in her pelvis like this; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be raised little by little, because all of this is forgotten until the broken bone returns to its place as shown and the fracture heals. 》
### Then place poultices on her back, and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, and then she should urinate; after that, replace it and return to the manner in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her first pillow.
### And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will be healed.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and strongly insert through the patient's anus a reed cannula; and interpose the entire bladder into his vagina, and then blow into the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated within the vagina, for the fracture will return.
Then it should be filled with cotton and remain in place for several days as we have recommended, until the patient is healed.
And when the bone of a man's or woman's thigh is broken, then administer to his restoration and mending what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which happen rarely, especially to one who has some learning and experience and understands this book of mine; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions in the right way towards his restoration and stricture, so understand well.
But in the man's penis when it is broken, take an onion and put the penis inside it; then place over him a wrapping of cloth, and have it wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or around that time, and he will be cured.
It seems like you are ready for more translation practice! However, as a text-based AI model, I'm unable to directly access external content or texts that you might be referring to. If you provide the specific medieval medical treatise text here, I can certainly help you translate it line by line into English.
Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
Based on the provided example and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And if the wound is bleeding, then it is necessary for you to apply pressure to stop the bleeding, sprinkling powdered zedoary root over the wound if there is no other pressing matter at hand.
And then proceed to set the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, lest an abscess forms.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the setting of the fracture until the ninth day, so that the abscess may subside, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth day altogether, for you will cause bad accidents to happen.
But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed, then it is necessary for you to carefully reduce it and smooth it with your hands using gentle pressure and minimal force.
But if the extension and alignment of the bone cannot be achieved with your hands, then you should reduce it using this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, with a length of seven or eight fingers, and its width depends on the size of the wound. And therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these instruments depending on what is needed in the care of all kinds of fractures.
"And if it is redundant, and there is little flesh in that area so that it does not become bent, you should place the compress over that area during the operation.
"And if there is an acute extremity which has margins on its extremities, and is more swollen above than below, and in the middle it separates into parts.
"And this is the shape of it:
"And it is called in Greek 'the willful hand', which means a small shovel.
"Because the sharp extremity should be placed with its pointed end raised above the prominent bone's extremity.
"And you should push that (sharp extremity) once until it reaches the bone and is surrounded by some swelling.
"And therefore you must surround the fracture's extremities between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not properly hold the instrument, then it is necessary for you to introduce the bone's extremity until the instrument has sufficient purchase.
"But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then introduce it with what is appropriate to the trephines which we have spoken of; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then scrape away what remains on the bones of roughness and small sharp pieces.
And when the bone is reduced, and then if the patient finds a very intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and in this case, do what you think will greatly benefit the patient.
After you have completed the restoration of the bone, then dip a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or any other substance that contains oil on the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption.
Then administer steel shavings at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut out the cloth with scissors and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this and caused death or severe illness on their patients, which is unfortunate. And if there is a slight tightness, loosen it, different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear that bad things could happen to it, as we have discussed, and you find pain in that area, then do not put bandages on it, but rather make an envelope of hard cloths instead of bandages and strengthen it with those.
And when, after one or two days, the wound has started to form pus, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it with vinegar, and then apply plasters, ointments which we are accustomed to use for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
And see to it that you loosen the bandage and examine the wound each day in the morning and evening until it is healed and firmly closed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the neighboring parts easily.
If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor the pus has been expelled, then know that there are maggots inside it, for which reason you must probe the wound with a probe. And of those maggots, those that are separate and protruding, remove and extract them; those that are not separated and afflict the member and cause pain, perforate and cut them as is possible for you to do so.
And if the wound becomes infected or ulcerated, and it is an abscess, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of these [infections] the water that is suitable for it, according to the preceding narrative in its chapter.
And concerning the water in which you should place your remedy and you should present your powder: when the bone is broken, protrude it over the member like the bones of the pelvis and ribs, similar to those of the large members; and do not attempt to attract it or extract it, because many times this causes death. Leave it alone until it can heal on its own, for within a few days or even thirty, it will fall back into place by itself; then treat the wound if you know how, otherwise leave it.
Chapter .20.
On the treatment of nodes that occur due to a fracture.
It often happens that this node occurs in the trace of a fracture, and it is particularly common near the joints, as it takes on the shape of the member; and very easily it prevents the member from its natural function.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And allow the extraction to not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and replace another one, until the swelling is reduced; or press firmly on that lead plate, because lead has the property of removing all inflammation in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is tight and requires removal immediately, then split it through its highest part, and cut away the excess and protruding parts, or scrape it with sharp instruments until the swelling is reduced; and treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter 21
Chapter 21: On the restoration of a fracture, when it has been restored and the limb is still weak and frail, not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture has been restored, and the limb still remains weak and frail, this is not due to a single cause but rather to multiple causes: one of which is excessive loosening or tightening of the bandages that was not done as needed; or due to excess tightness of the bandages until the nourishment cannot reach the limb; or due to excessive superfluous wrapping; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
Based on the given text, here's my attempt to translate and interpret the provided sentence:
And then place the hand on the member, so that the hand draws to it a little nourishment, or continuous irrigation with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of broken bones when they are misaligned and the operation is forbidden because it is harmful.
When the member that has been restored begins to heal from misalignment and protrusion of the broken bone and knot, and it is because of the swelling of the member's shape, however, the member is not forbidden its natural operation. Therefore, you should not accept the word of someone who believes that member is newly broken.
However, there have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very contemptible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to irrigate them with warm water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as leaves of mallow and roots of marshmallow, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be made with a softening plaster, such as well-made gum tragacanth; or take the mucilage of marshmallow root and mix it with egg white or oil of almonds, and plaster with that; or take fat figs and crush them with pigeon droppings, and similar ones from the medicines that are called amerments for consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light friction using moist hands, while also administering movement of the limb in all directions at all hours.
But if the curvature has already advanced and is firmly established, becoming calcified and requiring treatment with a needle, then it must be carefully perforated, and the continuity of the bone must be dissolved. The superfluous material caused by this condition should be cut away with fine scissors, and ease should be administered to the patient with due care and diligence.
Chapter .xxiii.
On speech and dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from their proper position, preventing movement and distorting the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately puncture and reduce it, without delaying the reduction; for if it is delayed, the site becomes swollen and difficult to reduce, making the treatment of the dislocation very difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or extend the limb during the swelling, as excessive movement causes cramps and intense pain.
When this happens, it is necessary for you to resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and immediately let out some blood so that the abscess can rest; then wrap the affected member in warm water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
And let every member be treated with the same water from which the memory will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation following the same order as in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment for dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated at the same time; and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places and somewhat softened, or they are completely dislocated until they are softened at the joint, to the point that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his word.
But when the dislocation is minor, it usually returns to its place on its own with little effort.
"However, if the dislocation is complete and total, then a gentle reduction should be administered immediately, without delaying at all.
"And the assistant should hold the head of the patient, while the doctor inserts his thumb into the dislocated jaw from one side with one hand, or both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be placed outside, gripping; and command the patient to cease moving their jaws and let them return to their proper place; and the doctor should grip the jaw and push it back until it returns to its original position.
"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer fumigation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
"And when they return and are gripped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place powdered cloth with wax over them, made of wax and rose oil; and then bind it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or the left; and do not force them to chew anything; let their food be softened lion [meat], until the pains have subsided and the jaws are loosened, then let them eat whatever they want.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated and have not returned to their proper place, then frequent fevers and cold water occur, and very easily raise the stomach of the patient, and very easily cause pure vomiting.
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and most often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the tip of the shoulder muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from within by its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated to the outside, and this is evident to touch.
"And the healing of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. "Then quickly close the area with your palm firmly, because it will return.
"Then place on it a plaster and bandages, and bind it tightly.
"But if the extremity that is the elbow and its continuation are not dislocated at all, then it should be reduced and splinted as we have said and as seems best to you.
"Then place on it a plaster, bandages, and tight wrapping, and instruct the patient to maintain peace and rest until he is healed.
"And with this same treatment, the tendon is reduced when it is separated from its place.
"Chapter 26.
"On the reduction of the dislocation of the tendon.
"Know that the tendon is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the tip to below.
"The second is that it is dislocated above the tendon, and this happens later; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front of the nerves.
Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And when it happens that a blow or fall occurs to some men, and their muscles swell with an acute hematoma, it is thought that it may already be dislocated by this.
Therefore, you should proceed with what is necessary to prepare yourself for his care, and then begin the treatment of him.
And it is known that the dislocation of him occurs when he has pain in the joints; you should tickle them, so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; you will find concavity at the end of the muscle, and by tickling it, you should touch the head of the muscle like an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their ear, nor move it in any way.
If it is dislocated, you should tickle the feet or ankles, and then you will find clear contact, which is not hidden.
And in this case of slight dislocation, when it is recent and the patient is a child, a light reduction is made.
The reduction of it is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand to the joint above; and then places their fingers below the ticklish part of the patient, and raises the joint strongly upwards to its place, and the attendant lifts the patient's hand, and extends it out; and then places it down because it returns slightly.
If the above treatment does not work and the dislocation persists from its initial onset for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water, and an embrocation that softens and loosens should be applied, such as a decoction of altea, fenugreek, and melilot in water. This should also be administered to the patient.
Then have the patient lie face down on their stomach and place a small cushion under their hips to provide support between lightness and firmness. The physician should then place their heel on the cushion, lift the patient's head with all their strength, pull the patient's hand backwards so that it is not drawn towards the lower parts, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not drawn towards the lower parts. For this treatment often brings the dislocation back to its proper place.
And if you wish to perform the treatment in another way: you should have present a man who is taller than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb. He should insert his thigh under the patient's hips and lift them upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. Another assistant should pull the patient's hand away from their stomach. If the patient is light (in weight), then it's necessary that someone else hold them, in order to cause gravity for the patient, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another way: which is to place a long stick on the ground with its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient is placed underneath; after that, cloths are placed over the head of the stick, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then one hand is extended towards the other side of the body; and the body is extended strongly on the other side, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: and that is, you take a stick whose length is two arms long, and its width is four fingers wide, and its thickness is reduced at both ends like this:
And then round cloths are tied over the top so that the stick does not injure the patient.
And then the patient is placed underneath the lower end of the stick, and their hand or arm is extended over the stick towards the other side, and the stick is tied around the thighs, the arms, and the extremity of the hand.
"Next, place the arms on a step of the ladder according to their length, and let the hands hang freely on the sides, while the other part remains suspended, because the joint is about to enter.
"And when the treatment of him is completed according to any method that is possible for you, then it is necessary to place underneath the splint a moderate amount of wool; and next apply a plaster prepared from powdered resin with vinegar and egg white over all the muscles, so that it wraps around. And then bind the splint tightly underneath, and the bandage should be wrapped over the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
"And it is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is easier for him to heal.
"And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and some exercise should be performed; and if it is fixed and not softened, then he is healed.
"However, if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to him or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three holes in that area, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
From the dislocation of that which is done to the feet and the breasts or the separated parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension by the hands until it returns.
And another stricture should be administered to that area, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it happens that the heaviness in the limb and the tardiness of its movement persist, then the patient should use warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, most commonly in front of or behind the shoulder blade. The dislocation of this joint is not hidden from you because it falls below the socket or touches another part according to which figure it is dislocated. And when you set the dislocated shoulder with the hand, it is clearly manifested to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary to cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the critical stage, because if it reaches that stage, the reduction becomes difficult, and a long time does not heal completely; especially when it is in the posterior direction, for of all other species of dislocation it is the worst, and most painful, and many heated things often bring death with them.
And the restoration of him, when it is possible to reduce (the dislocation), is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the elbows underneath him, and he should push the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the forward direction, then return it so that you bend his hand with your hand until you strike the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a strong extension and powerful motion.
And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly with two hands so that it is not moved away from the extension.
And then turn the arm towards every direction, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And for the reduction of this, it is necessary to place something over that paste in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be drawn out with a tight bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then release the bandage from the patient and leave it like that.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then reapply the paste and the bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; and then release it.
But if there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the patient's condition is agitated, then apply moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place a light cushion on the joint, if it is a large-scale movement; and then bind it, and leave it on the bones day and night. And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he comes out, then rub the joint with warm friction, and then reapply on top of that cushion, if it is round-shaped movement, once, and a second time, and a third time, "In the process of bathing, until it is clean.
"And if you want, place a wet and shaved cow's bladder on the affected area with a border or linen cloth on top; do this several times, because it is moist and returns to its proper state.
Chapter 28.
"Chapter 28: Treatment for shoulder dislocation, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
"Shoulder dislocation in the hand can sometimes be dislocated, and reducing the dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important to act quickly in reducing it within the hour of its dislocation, before the area swells or an abscess forms.
"The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the top of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
"However, it is important to consider if the palm has already separated from the hand. In that case, let the patient place the back of their hand on a table with extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be face down on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a cedar plaster to draw out the abscess and leave it alone; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you will not be able to bear or endure the reduction of the pus that passes to him each day.
However, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not tell the patient any reason, but rather that your hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then you should know that the nerves are pinched or twisted, and in this case, it will not be beneficial unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery near the affected area, and thus you will confer some benefit.
Therefore, once the illness has returned, place upon it the plaster which we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterward, unbind it and let it be left alone, and exercise the patient's hand.
But if the patient's movement is hindered and some serious condition occurs, then apply warmth to that area with hot water and some friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
"Sometimes these [joints/bones] are dislocated in all directions.
When a finger is dislocated to the back of the palm or the front of it, then hold the finger and use your thumbs to push the dislocation until it returns to its original position.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own time that day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that account, and do not cease to unbind it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for a few days until it is straight.
And do the same with this, if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and bind it to that part and perform the first operation with the thumb until it is healed.
Similarly, do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX
Of the treatment for the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to someone that the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated and many vertebrae have been removed from their places, then there is no cure for that, because death overtakes the patient.
And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is expelled without will and cannot be retained; and many times some members are weakened, such as both thighs or both arms or one of those; or a vertebra has been moved from its place, because many times it is moved and many times the removal of those is done to four parts.
Therefore, that [vertebra] has already been moved to the posterior regions and is named lordosis.
However, the cure for this is that one should consider if lordosis occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure for it, nor is there complete healing of that.
But for those that come about due to injury or blow or similar causes, the ancients have spoken of various manners of cure with lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit is derived; but I have abbreviated this, so as not to bore you with too much of it, in accordance with my own understanding. With this method, I have expounded and shaped it using diverse instruments, by means of which I will show this and explain it.
And of those (pains), only that which occurs in the back is cured with what I recommend.
And have the patient lie on their back, near a wall, and place a wet cloth underneath them to prevent their feet from being lifted.
And place a straight stick in the ground at the head of the patient, near their face, and another stick at their feet on the other end of the bed.
And one assistant should hold the stick and not fix it in a hole; another assistant should hold the other (stick) in the same manner.
And then wrap the bandage around the patient's head and under their chin, extend the end of the bandage to the stick near their head and tie it there; and then place another bandage on their thighs, between their legs, over their knees and ankles; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick at their feet.
And then each assistant should extend the bandage to the base of the stick, and do not move the two sticks or the bandages from their positions where they are placed, but rather keep them loose as we said.
And the physician places their palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places something on top of it, and then adjusts their feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is approximately three arms' lengths, and make a hole in the wall near the patient so that the end of the table can fit into it. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places their feet on the other end of the table and pulls hard until the spine is narrowed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, turn the one that is rolled with the hand; and it should be such that you place the patient's head at the end of two stakes, the length of which should be an arm's length, and place their head in the same way on two stakes; and let there be a palm's width between each stake. And then each stake has been drilled with a hole through which a rope can run, and each stake is firmly secured to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be another round stake through which the rope runs, and it should be wound around the two holes of the two stakes.
And at the end of it is a hole in which a stick is inserted, and its length is one palm high and wrapped around; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to this.
Then strengthen the bindings that you have tightened in the patient's feet around the hole that is nearest to their head, and the bindings that you have tightened on their thighs around the turn nearest to their feet.
Then there should be a minister at each turn who turns the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine as we have said.
Then after the spine has been returned and the place has been aligned, it is necessary to put an exfoliating plaster made with egg white and then wool; and then place on the plaster a wooden board whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length is such that it covers the swollen area, and above the part of the spine.
Then it should be bound with the binding we mentioned earlier, and the patient should be fed with light food until they are healed.
And if there is any sign of swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and cleanse with the administration of the recommended table for a long time; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
Based on the given text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Chapter 31
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocated, and not treated with what is done to other joints for minor displacement or concavity.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: either into the interior parts, or into the exterior parts, or into the anterior parts, or into the posterior parts.
And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely in front or behind.
And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when you straighten the patient's healthy leg and compare it with the sick one, the sick one is longer and the knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the knee, and the area where the swelling appears is hot, because the head of the thigh bone has already arrived here. ️
And the sign for that which has been dislocated outward is that its conditions are opposite to those just mentioned.
And the sign for that which has been dislocated forward is that it extends its thigh according to its nature, but nevertheless cannot bend without pain in the knee, and if it tries to walk, it cannot move toward the front; and its urine is retained, and its groin is swollen, and it walks on its heel. ️
This text appears to be a description of the signs and symptoms of a dislocation in the hip or pelvic region. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Certainly! Let's translate the sentence step by step:
Here's my attempt to translate the text into English:
And if the extension of it or the separation inside is from the armpit to the collarbone, or from behind to the back.
And if the extension of all these happens at once, until the patient is raised from the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then all kinds of treatment for the proper cure are necessary.
In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back; and then place the ligaments over the shoulder bone in that place which is between the head of the shoulder and the place below the armpit; and then extend the ligament from above the part of the armpit to the highest part of the collarbone.
Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient and firmly grasp the large part of the diseased shoulder, and extend it to the external parts with great force, for that returns it to its place.
And this type is a lighter cure with which this member is reduced than the other types.
Based on the context and the language used in the previous lines, here's a possible translation for this sentence:
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the leg of the patient be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And have the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and let them be in the highest position; and let the length from their feet to the ground be two arm lengths.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the bed, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man pulls the bed strongly with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation at the exit point, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended in having them kneel; and let the ligament be strengthened properly on the affected leg and on their feet.
And then two posts should be placed, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then posts should be placed in the middle of the bed covered with damp cloths, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their thighs, for you need the extension at the exit points not to be impeded.
And then each assistant should extend towards their respective side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the thigh be slightly extended, and according to this same narrative, [it should be] on a pillow; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's knee, and then presses that with the other hand, and with that pressure, he extends [the leg] towards the back part at the back of the thigh.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, and he should be raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as we have said about the elevation if his ankle is dislocated outward, as we have described the positioning of him on two ankles; and it is with his face down and the limbs extended, as we have said, there is nothing more.
And it is necessary that a compression with a board be applied onto the location where the joint is.
So, when the reduction is complete according to what is necessary — and you see the sign of the reduction in him, which is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient extends his leg and expands it without excuse, then know that the member has returned as is necessary. Then place two cushions and apply a poultice, and bind tightly so that the swelling is not increased in any part; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
At that point, if you see those joints in order, then know that the dislocation is now healed, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
Then remove that plaster, and make the patient walk with support on each side for several days, until he is comfortable.
Capítulo XXXII. (Chapter 32)
About the care for dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the sides outward, and to the sides inward, and more often to the sides behind; but it cannot be dislocated to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their thigh with the knee; then you know that the elbow is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient sit upright, so that they extend their leg, if possible over it; attach your thumb to the face of it, and place the patient's foot between your feet; then make the elbow adhere to your palms, and hold them firmly on the elbow with your thumbs, and another assistant extends his foot until the elbow returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the thigh adheres to the knee with effortless ease.
Then bandage it and make the thigh adhere to the knee, then bind both together at once with a band for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the treatment for ankle dislocation.
The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the degree, and its dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swell in the direction to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment for its slight displacement is easy reduction, which is to extend it gently with the hands and wrap it until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated to a greater degree, you must make the patient lie down straight, and he should have a strong and capable assistant behind him in the middle of his back.
And then with your right hand take the foot from the upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot near the ankle.
And now pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right above the thigh without effort.
And do this twice as we have agreed.
And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore, if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, for that returns.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him with this that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly tie a bandage on the ground, and let it go between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth over him so that the patient does not become cold.
And then the assistant should hold his thighs, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a band that lies on the knee of the foot; and then each assistant should extend against the extension of his partner, and let the band be stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body is not pulled towards the ends beyond its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant holds the healthy joint at the edges, because the dislocation returns easily.
And once the dislocation has returned and you have ascertained the health of the reduction, then place a poultice and tightly bind it with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And beware or take care of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage on it is not harsh and does not press too strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if the patient insists on walking before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it may not receive healing.
And if an abscess forms, then you should administer to the patient that which was mentioned earlier in our treatise, in another section on treatment and application, until it is removed.
**Chapter XXXIV.**
**On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.**
**It is advised that the one who is dislocated should be wrapped with a bandage of moderate length without difficulty; this task is not difficult but rather easy.**
**However, if the dislocation is in some of the toes at the back of the foot, then you should have the patient sit on a hard surface such as the ground or a table, and be in this position as if they were walking.**
**Then you should stand on the patient's foot and place your own foot over what seems to be the joint, then press with your foot with all your strength until it returns to its original position, and you will see that it is wrapped and does not protrude.**
**Then place under the sole of their foot a board that covers the entire foot, which has two handles; then strengthen it with moderate and firm bandages for three days; then loosen them and have the patient rest from walking for many days until it is strengthened and healing is assured.**
**Chapter XXXV.**
**On the types of dislocation that occur with injury, or with fracture, or with both together.**
When some cause of this occurs and you engage in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death follows.
And for this reason, one should not presume over the treatment of it except someone who is wise in the art, with long practice, merciful and pious, patient, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that cauterize only slightly, and leaves the sick person to divine judgment, unless there is hope for him to be saved from perdition, with some relief from the illness, and in which some hope appears. And then strive immediately to bring about a reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes cauterized by an abscess.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a remedy that cauterizes the abscess and treats the wound with what is convenient among the desiccating ointments.
And if there is dislocation with fracture and the bones are separated into pieces, then you should first reduce them, and do in this what we have said before in simple illnesses of this kind.
And protect and avoid according to your virtue that which comes from within through the ways of fear as preceded by my prediction; for this is better for you, you should honor your Creator, and it will be more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis, may God be praised. Indeed.
