Oh, my sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, its completion has been achieved in it and through its expositions and clarifications, it seems to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operations by hand, which is surgery.
For the operation by hand is neglected in our region and in our time, to such an extent that its science has nearly perished, and its traces have been effaced; nothing remains of it except a few brief descriptions in the books of the ancients, which they altered most and thus fell into error and confusion, until their meanings were closed off and its force and art were prolonged.
And it is clear to me that I should revive this [science] with the ordering of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as they are necessary for the addition of clarification, and for its preparation.
However, the reason why a good craftsman with his hands cannot be found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints of the members and their forms, and the connections and separations of them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, as well as their number and placement; and of the pulsating veins and those at rest, and the places from which they emerge.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that a name is nothing, but in the work, it is small, and mostly in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will be unable to avoid falling into error, which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen many times, because some are trained in this science and yet reject it without knowledge or experience.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an erysipelatous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed until the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had it in his bladder, and the stone was large, and he came upon it and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day the man died.
And I was already called to remove that stone, and when I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would die under my care.
Certainly! Here is the translation of your provided text:
And then loosen him according to his desires, and then bind him again, and then let him lie still for some days, and command that we unbind the bandage; and thus it went on until the space and the foot were infected, and reached destruction.
And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus he found peace and so his pains decreased.
However, corruption was already established in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was greatly increased with its lord.
The cause of which is because the cancerous abscess is full of melancholic humor, so it is not good that iron should come to it from all directions, but rather that there should be a member where it can be hosted.
And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two directions: this is, in an operation associated with health, and in work which involves great risk in the most important conditions.
And I have already explained this in every part of this book where an operation takes place that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and under the protection of God, and tend to your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God to achieve healing and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to cure. Set aside your arms from what makes you fearful, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more glorious for you, and all the more so in this world and forever after for your sanctity.
Galen has already discussed this in certain of his treatises: "Do not practice bad medicine, lest you be called bad doctors.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of all the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head and feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the irons of the cauteries, and on what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on incision and puncture, and on cupping glasses, and on ulcers, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all of which is arranged according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar things; a chapter arranged from head to toe, and according to the forms of the instruments.
I will tell you about the qualities of the instruments for that cautery and their disadvantages, and in what circumstances it is forbidden to use cautery.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery instrument and its disadvantages is long and complex, subtle in knowledge, and secretly hidden; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and for me, only a small part of their discussions is enough, lest my speech become too long.
And so I say that you can perform cautery on any condition, whether it has matter or not, except for two conditions, which are cold conditions without matter. ething
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And one who says the contrary of this, that through cauterization, improvement is immediately made in every dry and cold disease that appears in men's bodies; for when you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the man's body cold.
And I say by the word of that one, that I have already experienced this many times myself.
However, it is not fitting that this should be done by someone who has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery through recent exercise, and who has known the diversity of man's constitution and the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as the causes of those illnesses and their accidents, and the duration of time for each.
But in other constitutions, there is no need to fear this, and especially in cold and moist illnesses; for all doctors have agreed upon these, and they are not disagreed upon in the improvement with cautery in them.
And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, it is said that there is cautery with medicine that burns; this is because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and does not harm the other members associated with it except for a small injury.
"However, the action of medicine reaches that part of the body which is distant from the affected member, and it quickly brings about difficult healing in the afflicted member and causes a swift remedy.
"However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but flow out. It is already known to us through experience and long study in this art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of the discourse. And if it were not that it is not read in my book, I would here reveal to you a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your intellects.
"And know, my sons, that they differ in opinion about the time when it is best to perform cautery and consider the best time to be spring.
"And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit obtained from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong and persistent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that greater evil will come, which is more than a small harm due to the time.
And this is not what you should think in your minds, o children, for only the common people and foolish doctors think so. This is because for that illness which can be cured by cautery, there is always a chance of relapse, and they stop at that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think because of this: cautery is used only in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of the pains.
But nevertheless, cautery is superior to medicine in terms of its strength and the power of its action and the greatness of its lordship.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his strength, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he has acquired in his diet and similar causes; unless the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few excesses and humidities, such as cautery of a tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return to him. But this is done in small amounts.
And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a true statement because I understand in it that they believe it is not a cure that benefits with medicine or any other cause except for cautery.
And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort in medicine is only when administering methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it benefits for that purpose. And from here it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not cause scarring, as if this were absolutely true, for I have already proved and found that this is not so except in some bodies without others, and cauterizing with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but nevertheless when you make a cautery with fire and gold, it is not specified to you, for it is ignited according to the quantity you want by the rust of the gold, and because it prepares to receive cold; and if you place a fire on top of it, the gold melts from the heat, and some thin sheets fall into the fire due to the occupation of that.
And for this, a cautery with iron should be made less heavily and more delicately in accordance with the operation's requirements.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those from head to toe, so that the inquirer may choose what he wants.
The first chapter.
This cauterization removes cold and dampness from the body, which are two causes of many accidents; it is the cause of sweat and excessive flow of rheumatic humors, known as "corissa," flowing from the head to the parts around the eyes and ears, sleepiness, toothache and sore throat, and generally all illnesses caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sweating, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The manner of this cauterization is as follows: firstly, instruct the patient to be purged with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then make that person sit between your hands on a low bench, and have them place their hands on their feet.
And then place the edge of your palm near the foot on the edge of the nose between its nostrils. But when your hand reaches the middle of the foot, mark that spot with a stylus, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that [cautery] on the marked spot, in such a way that it descends, with which you should slowly tighten your hand, and you rotate it.
And then lightly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone's head revealed, even as small as a grain of barley, then lift your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron, or with another one like it, until you see what I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it in water over the spot and leave it for three days.
And then place on him a cloth soaked in vinegar and let it stay on him until the scab of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the spot with a four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
And they have said that as long as the wound remains open, it is better for the arm, because it is more beneficial and healing.
And they said that the tendon should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be kept there until some part of the bone’s appearance is altered.
And then it should be scraped off whatever is attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others said that with the cautery one should reach to the end, until it strongly presses into the bone, until the bone breaks, and this is the form of small incision. And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men according to the way of fear; and leave that aside, tell me, is it better with health, when it exists; because the head is opened by a break in its continuity as we have shown in the other members, especially when the patient's head is of frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that kind and with that work, one heals.
Chapter two.
Of cautery of the head.
When the entire head experiences chronic and prolonged pain in the patient, and various remedies such as hellebore, cupping, bloodletting, plasters, baths, cups, poultices, and similar treatments have been used, especially if cautery has already been performed with a cauterizing tool that fails to provide any benefit from these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; if it is not weak but rather very cold, then cauterize again with another cautery a little below that one. Then cauterize that area on the crown of the head with a cautery until the scalp is divided. After the scalp is cut and the bone is exposed to the extent we have mentioned, cauterize that area with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place called "vas,"—and this is the place where a cupping glass is placed. And be careful in this matter, and do not expose the bone, for the patient finds very great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
I say this about the cautery in its place, for the cautery with which the crowns of the head and the occiput are cauterized should be finer than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is how it should be done.
"Chapter three.
"About the recent cautery for migraines.
"When the pain in the head is severe or spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purgative medicines, and the other treatment that I have mentioned in the diseases of the head should be administered; if this does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either with a sharp-burning medicine or with iron.
"But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take an aloe leaf, clean it and bind the ends of it from both sides. "Then you should make an incision in the place of pain in the temple with a loaded lancet, so that it is well-placed under the skin, until it is hidden.
"Then apply pressure on it with a bandage for constant compression, and leave it for the duration of three hours; then remove the bandage and take away the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place on it a cotton swab soaked in vinegar until the spot turns red.
"Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
"And if you go, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
"But the cauterization should be done with iron, following this manner: it is formed as follows:
"It is called a 'nail' because its tip is shaped like the head of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protuberance.
"Then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the instrument is not shaken excessively — and turn the iron slowly and steadily.
"And if the part that is shaken by the movement of the chain reaches about half of it, then raise your hand to prevent the instrument from being shaken excessively, so that there will not be a flow of blood.
"Then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the site, and leave it there for three days; then place a cloth with padding, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
"And if you go, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to this manner, and be careful not to cut an artery in this particular region that is not ancient.
Capitol quart. Chapter four (or fourth chapter).
Of the cautery for an old migraine.
When you cure migraine with the previous method of treatment that we have mentioned, and it is not effective, and sometimes due to the illness that what we said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough for him, then you should heat the sharpened cautery until it turns white. This indicates on the painful spot a line lengthwise, which is the greater part of the finger, either this one or that one; and place your hand on it once and strongly, until you pierce the skin and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to continue to the jawbone, which is thick due to chewing, and that the tendon is not cut and the nerves that cause pain there, lest spasm occur.
And if it concerns the caution and precaution of bleeding from an artery that is cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; therefore, leave the operation to someone more knowledgeable at first.
And I come with the reminder of the treatment for bleeding accidents due to archery according to its own manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerant, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on archery wounds with two blades, and this is a better and more effective cautery.
Chapter .5
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is not cured by laxatives or other treatments that I have mentioned in the previous section, then burn with a cautery, and this one is called "point", of which this is the form:
And then touch the tip of the fire, and lead it around the entire ear as if turning a wheel, or in a circle on each side if the pain is on one side. Approach with the tip of the cautery along the edge of the ear little by little, until you have clearly felt the spot with your fingertip.
And if you apply the pointed cautery on the entire ear, and cut it off, then promptly care for the areas until they are healed.
Chapter VI
About cauterizing the throat.
The throat which is cured and treated by cautery is only from the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterizing the throat for conditions caused by dryness or nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of throat illness with potions, purges and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the affected side, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
The way to perform the cauterization is as follows: Cauterize with one cautery at the top of the ear, a little higher than the corner of the head, and with another on the temple, whose length should be equal to that of the thumb. Place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of a cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is shown in the previous illustration. But this one is more delicate than that one, a little like bladders; and it is necessary to remove some of its excessive thickness.
Then care for the area with water as has been processed before until it is healed.
Chapter VII
Of Cautery for Old Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done as was said above.
And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and that is even more urgent; and then it should be cared for with processed water.
Chapter VIII
On Cautery for Forgetfulness Caused by Fever
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large bowls and pills to serve as purgatives.
And next, shave the entire head of the patient and place on his crown the plaster of wax described in the treatise on plasters.
And pause several times, because that is the manner of cautery. And do this according to the order of the aforementioned treatment that I have already mentioned.
And if by that the patient is healed well; and if not, then do three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which descend from the most superior part of the head to the most inferior part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that has been prepared.
But if you see an increase and the patient is not tolerating it well, then do a cautery in the middle of the area; and if you see a greater increase, then cauterize that on both corners.
Then cure it until it is healed; and the cauteries should be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Chapter IX
On the cautery of parasites and on softening the entire body.
Begin by processing the head for cleansing with jars and water as we have said; then shave the patient's head, then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the posterior part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body from too much and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and afterward cauterize until it is completely relieved of the pain of it, and raise your hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized in olive oil.
Chapter 10
On the Cautery of Epilepsy
Do not cauterize the epileptic unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure that we have said in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticators to serve as cleansers, before that for several days, with the improvement of food.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on his occiput, and on each horn of the head, cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and enduring, then use a cautery as I have mentioned, with paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And it should be cauterized with olive oil as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Chapter XI
On Cauterizing Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and gross flame, then use a cautery as we mentioned earlier, with the patient being in a state of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid that turns into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to cleanse their brain, as previously described in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a pigeon coop of it, placed decently on the crown, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be seated, with their whole body supported.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more fitting to use an old remedy of sheep. And heat that one over the fire for a measured tempered warmth, which it is said they suffer more in themselves. And then turn that one to the middle of their head within the circle, and pour it in until they are frozen.
And do this with the patient every day for a week, along with the other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area with small points according to their size, unless you have your hand on a cautery prepared in this way: this is the type of cautery that soaks the brain with equality.
Then place that bandage soaked in water or in linseed oil.
Chapter XII
About the cautery of water descending into the eye.
When you have recognized the beginning of water in the eye by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies their head, and protect them from all moisture.
And have them bathe in warm water for several days.
And then order them to shave their head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning is the outflow of water from both eyes, or with one stroke if the beginning is from one eye.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone using a cautery; and let the cauteries be in that region, near the temples.
And beware of blood loss when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood loss from him, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their removal, and care for preventing blood loss.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries that are suitably produced.
Chapter XIII
On the Cautery of Old Tears.
When tears from the eyes are old and persistent due to the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, and it is proven that this is an excess of phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below the bones. And if you need to add [more], then cauterize that along the entire length of the tail of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capítulo XIV.
Sobre la cauterización del olor desagradable del nariz.
Cuando tratas a alguien con el remedio que hemos mencionado en la división y tu tratamiento no es efectivo, entonces prepara y da al paciente cochias para beber durante tres noches; luego ráspale el cabello y cauteriza con un cauterio de hierro o un cauterio de olivo. Luego cauteriza con un cauterio de clavo y dos cauterios en cada una de las cejas, dejando un poco de cabello entre ellos.
Y ten cuidado para que no quemes demasiado esa área.
Y esta es la forma del cauterio de clavo.
Capítulo XV.
Sobre la cauterización para ablandar los párpados de los ojos.
Cuando los párpados de los ojos se ablandan debido a una enfermedad o humedad, entonces cauteriza ese párpado con un cauterio con este cauterio lunar; y esta es su forma:
Y si lo haces, cauteriza ese párpado en cada una de las cejas, dejando un poco entre ellas y dos cauterios a lo largo de toda la parte de las cejas. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI
On the cautery of the eye when the eyelashes turn inward and close the eye.
When the eyelashes of the eye turn inward so that they puncture the eye, cautery is performed on them in two ways: either by burning or with a cauterizing medicine.
If the cautery is by fire, command the patient beforehand to let their eyelashes grow as those which are untrimmed; and if it hurts them, then you should strengthen their eyes with a bandage so that they are not worse off until the eyelashes have grown back.
When they have grown back and are trimmed, then place the patient's head on your lap, and carefully touch the edge of the eyelid with a probe, in the shape of a holly leaf, beginning at the eyelashes.
And then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or a poultice of fenugreek on the eye.
And then heat the cautery, the shape of which is this.
And then cauterize on the figure you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the tendon is burned as if it were a myrtle leaf, clearly evident.
The sign of the success of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it raised above the puncture of the eye.
And so lift your hand and let it be for three days, and then place on it cotton with a border until the crust has dried up. Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hair returns for any reason to its original state and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that area just as you did at first.
But if the hair is on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is smoothed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
Sure, let's translate this step-by-step:
And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly without removing it until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the bite is in them like fire.
And thus when he perceives that he has found the bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger; thus when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and at this point consider if you see the eyelid raised as if washed by the constriction of fire or by incision, for at that moment it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where the medicine was not previously applied and do not stop until your operation is complete and the wound is healed.
Then place on him a cloth with padding until the swelling of the abscess has subsided, and then treat it with a healing ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls into the wound, and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and any hair touches the wound, then apply more medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, in the same manner as at the beginning, and then bandage it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that human feet are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your treatment is made accordingly.
And the way of rectitude should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with the water we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it according to this manner: tell the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let some assistant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken by his head.
Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white or birdlime over the patient's eye.
And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, with one end used for the cautery.
And if you wish, let it penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, it may be so as you attempt.
But, however, that which is hollow is better for the task at hand.
Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it blood and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place over it the cautery which is well-lit, and with that hand hold a little above the cautery of the nostril towards the bridge of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient becomes anxious; then place the cautery in the groove of the nostril and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place over that wound a bandage and surround it with drying ointment until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place over it corrosive medication until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: take the place of the fistula and open it, and then place in that fissure a very thin piece of which is the form of it; and pour into it as much as one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a camaium with good tension, so that the patient is not discomforted because the melted lead does not reach the nostril of that; and you must place over the nostril of the patient a cotton swab impregnated in egg white or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing. ➤
And if the fistula is healed with the method mentioned before using cautery and care, it's good; but if not, then it's necessary to administer a traction through the nose and reduce the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of the Crack of the Buttocks.
Many times these cracks occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and it does not benefit your treatment, then apply a small pointed cautery knife according to this manner that follows:
And let the concavity of it be according to the subtlety of the little knife.
Then place this carefully into those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth
When an abscess develops in the soft palate or on the hard palate or between the teeth, and it swells up, and then bursts, and becomes chronic, and foul-smelling pus is produced, making a fistula, and you treat it but the treatment does not benefit, then you should heat a cautery according to how much will be inserted into the fistula, and then place this heated [cautery] in the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches its bottom, and do this one or two times; and then treat it with the method we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And therefore, if the pus is drained and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones according to what will be found in its chapter.
Chapter XX
Of the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you have treated them with medicines but to no avail, then place the patient's head in your lap. And quickly prepare the cautery, whose form will be described below, so that you place the tip of the cautery over the tooth and insert it into the cavity, and hold your hand a little behind so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth when it reaches there.
Then lift your hand and then repeat with the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
Chapter XXI
Of the use of the caustic to treat toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or if there is swelling or worms present and you cannot cure it with medicine, then cauterize in that area according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
To cauterize with a horn is to take a cow's horn and place it in the coals of the fire, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, then dip that wrapped horn into hot water, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it becomes numb.
And repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned liquid, and place it on the painful tooth, and place hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire should be done using a small hollow tube of iron or brass, and there should be some wax or grease inside to prevent the heat from reaching the patient's mouth too directly.
And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth while keeping your hand on it until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will decrease either on that day or the next day.
And it is advisable that through the application of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is how to shape the cautery.
And cauterize with whatever material you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
And this is how the cannula should be made:
Chapter 22
On Cautery for Protrusions
When protrusions are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestive medicines, and you see their digestion improving slightly, then ignite the cautery in the shape that follows: it should have two open ends so that smoke can escape from one end while the other end is applied to the abscess. Place the heated cautery on the protrusion once, or more if needed, until it reaches the core of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then press the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it remain for three days, then place a cloth soaked in wine on top until that which the fire has burnt is removed.
Then care for him with ointments, linen bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
Chapter 23.
On cauterizing hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
When humidity affects the throat of the lungs, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of the chest, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize them where the throat is depressed.
And take care not to penetrate with the cautery into the throat or burn too much of the neck area.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of him. The cautery for it should be made in the same way as mentioned before.
Then care for that with water as mentioned earlier until he is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of Cauterization for Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize with two cauteries on the depression of the furcula in the swollen and bulging areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two small bones; and let the cauteries be nailed according to the aforementioned form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery called "punctum," the form of which precedes in the puncturing for earache.
And let there be points between them; and then treat with the water previously mentioned until it is healed.
And the cauteries must have three branches, for cauterization is done with that: and you can do three cauteries in one go according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of Cauterization for Tinnitus, which is the Head of the Ear.
When the head of the ear is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not return on its own, you must reduce its dislocation until it returns to its normal state. Then, with a slight movement, it will return to its place, as we have shown. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, then place the patient on their back or side; and then raise the handle that is inside the auditory canal upwards with your left hand fingers if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then ignite the cautery which has two points; and this is its shape:
And then cauterize the vein until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then have four points of cautery.
And sometimes it is done according to this count, because there are eight points for cautery.
And then sprinkle powdered salt on the cautery, and then make the patient rest, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this is done later, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or with many cautery points, because the joint will be strengthened and the moisture dried out and the patient will be cured.
Chapter XXVI
On the Cauterization of the Stomach
When there is cold and excessive moisture in the stomach to the point that it exits its composition and increases raumas in him, and if you continue with the manner of treatment without success, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back, and to extend his hands and feet, and then cauterize him with three points: one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauteries beside the spine of the first cautery, so that the figure of cauterization is triangular; and ensure that they are not too close together, lest they cause burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the heel.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach should be punctured in that place where you are afraid of this cautery: and it is that you know on the stomach to point according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize that with a cautery in those points; and then cure that with the preceding cure until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On cauterizing the cold foot.
When pain in the foot occurs due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness until its normal fullness is expelled through superfluous exit, and the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and not with food, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back with his head raised, and examine with a probe three cauteries according to this form and quantity, placing them under the foot below the hypochondria, which is called the decubitus of man.
And let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of the said [cautery or part], and let the cauteries be placed according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press too hard with the cauteries.
And if the amount of water that is drawn is less than half the volume of the bladder, it is not well adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; then they should sit down, having already extended their legs, and raised their arms.
And it is possible for you to make these cauteries with a pointed blade, if you have the skill and judgment in this art.
And be careful not to press too hard during cauterization, and let the bladder be drawn completely for the entire body to be emptied and to enter into the intestines, because the bladder is delicate here; and know this.
Chapter 28
On piercing an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
When a person has an abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience severe pain without sharpness.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English: "And cauterize with that [cautery] and burn until the entire cord is burned away, until it reaches the hipbone, until blood appears.
And treat that wound with the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this type of cautery except for those which are prolonged in the art of medicine and are known by most ill people; however, if you have attempted this operation a few times with success, then you should abandon that one and choose this method instead, as it is better.
Chapter 29.
About the cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancient physicians used to cauterize the root of the ribs in pleurisy according to this manner, and that is what you should do: take a long, dry reed of moderate thickness, roughly the size of your finger.
Then dip that reed in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly slanting towards the side under the chin, and with two cauteries on that which is slanting between the fifth rib and the twelfth, slanting a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the sides of the back; and with one cautery in that spot which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you place your hand with the cautery, but rather have it in plain view of the patient during the procedure.
And some ancient physicians used to say that there are some men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until they reach the abscess and drain the pus, as we have said regarding the abscess of the foot.
But in this procedure with the cautery, one should not act without caution, for one could die immediately if an unhealed fistula is pierced.
Chapter .30
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen with what has been said about treatment in the division, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of them is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen, following the figure of the foot's cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as that which has been said for the foot's cauteries likewise.
"And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be on their back.
"And there is another way to cauterize, which is to heat the cautery having two openings, as we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is at the end of the mug, so that the left side of the patient lies flat.
"And let your elevation with which you lift the chain be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
"And then insert the two openings, heating them well, into that opening where you have penetrated with the chain from the other side.
"And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
"And if you wish, cauterize with a three-opening cautery.
"And then care for the cautery since it has ceased to throw out pus for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes mentioned in the treatment.
"Chapter .31.
"On Cauterizing Dropsy Patients
"Cautery is not used in dropsy patients except for the bladder specifically.
When you treat the dropsical patient with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the kidney, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And let the depth of the cauterization be appropriate to the thickness of the cord.
And then leave the cautery open so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of treatment near the cautery with water that is necessary, so that there may be added to him two intentions, and he will be quickly healed with the help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be pointed like the one described above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 32.
On Cauterization of Feet and Testicles
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the place that is between the auricular and anular bones, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, because the stagnant water will rise.
Es el procedimiento con el cauterio de la siguiente manera: Y entonces haz sobre ambos costados dos puntos de cauterización, y en cada punto se hará una pequeña incisión con la punta del bisturí. Sea el cauterio del tamaño de la hernia: uno en lo alto y otro en el medio de la hernia; y sobre cada hernia, haz dos puntos de cauterización.
Deja la herida abierta sin curarla durante mucho tiempo para que cualquier agua pueda drenar de ella.
Entonces cura con esos métodos que hemos mencionado.
Capítulo XXXIII.
Sobre la cauterización del ombligo.
Cuando el ombligo está afectado por frío y humedad, lo que debilita las virtudes, es decir, la virtud digestiva y retentiva, que están en el estómago e intestinos, se cura de esta manera: evitar el viento y los alimentos crudos. A veces el paciente sufre un desequilibrio en la virtud, entonces haz una gran cauterización sobre su estómago, siguiendo el procedimiento anterior para la cauterización del estómago, con una cauterización circular y cuatro pequeñas cauterizaciones alrededor del ombligo, así como una pequeña cauterización en forma de clavo; y una cauterización sobre la parte superior del abdomen, ya sea grande o dos pequeñas.
And if you see excessive humidity and the patient tolerating it, then cauterize that area on the penis and the intestines, and firmly place two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, because this is a perfect cure for improving which there will be no error.
**Chapter XXXIV.**
On the Cautery of Old Hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids in nature, either from gross humor infiltration or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with the water we mentioned in the division and do not confer a complete cure, then cauterize with three cauteries under the small of the back, close to the spine, in the shape of a small triangle, and one on top of the navel, which goes through two fingers' width.
And if you suspect that his stomach is infiltrated and his food is not digested, and his face appears swollen, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and one on the spleen, and another on his liver with a pointed cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
It looks like you provided the title of a chapter rather than a full sentence. If you can provide a complete sentence or passage from the text, I'll be happy to help translate it into English.
About cauterizing an artery near an abscess.
When you cut an artery, then you heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that heated (cautery) into the cut artery and continue pressing with your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, because if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water that you have mixed with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial for healing.
Chapter Thirty-Six
About cauterizing fistulas that are made in the lower parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in the lower part of the body and it is old, it produces pus and corrupt humors; thus, what is most worthy to do is to probe it with a fine probe, and then measure its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Approach with the cautery that resembles a stingray. Then approach and apply that cautery, heated in this manner, according to the degree of the patient's pain.
And repeat with that cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned at least once or twice or three times, according to the degree of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes toward the bladder or intestines, then avoid all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy and thick place that you judge will not penetrate deeply.
Then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are drained from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you know that it has been completely cured.
And if the materials are not drained from it, then you know that it is penetrating into the marrow of the rotten bone, or this results from those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Chapter XXXVII
On Cauterizing Hemorrhoids
When in the hemorrhoids there is pain caused by cold or excessive flatulence, and because of this the patient's rectum becomes irritated, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hemorrhoids with a cautery on each hemorrhoid with a needle-like cautery, as will be remembered.
And then they proceed to cauterize with the second one a little below, so that three consecutive cauteries will follow, and thus they will be stronger in support.
Capitulo XXXVIII.
Sobre la cauterización de la vejiga.
Cuando ocurre en la vejiga debilidad y suavización por frío y humedad, hasta el punto en que el paciente no puede retener la orina, entonces cauterice esa área un poco más abajo de la vejiga, donde comienzan los pelos del pubis, y caucerize con un cauterio a la derecha y otro a la izquierda de él.
Y que la longitud de cada cauterio sea según la cantidad de los nudos del muslo; y caucerice esa área con un cauterio en la parte más baja de la espalda, o con dos cauterios si es necesario.
Y que el cauterio sea clavado según que se procesa.
Capítulo XXXIX.
Sobre la cauterización del estómago.
Cuando hay frío y humedad en el estómago, y por eso se impide la concepción, y las menstruaciones son corruptas y se retrasan, y ocurre dolor durante su evacuación, entonces se debe cauterizar ese lugar con tres cauterios alrededor del ombligo, como hemos dicho en la cauterización de la vejiga; y un cauterio más abajo en la espalda, o dos cauterios, y que los cauterios sean clavados.
"Capitulum .xl." translates to "Chapter 40" in English. In this context, it appears that the text is divided into sections or chapters for easier reference and navigation.
"De cauterización de la dislocación del tobillo.
When moisture is secreted at the area of the anus, and these causes are displaced from their place, a sign of this is that one part extends over the other when compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is found in him who is bent.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of his anus with a circular-shaped cautery, because you will find a sign with a probe in the circle around the area, as if it were turned around, and so that the area falls exactly in the middle of the circle.
And let the form of the previously mentioned cautery be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three cauteries using a large olive-sized cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the thickness of the entire cord; and then care for him until he is cured.
Chapter XL I
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein
When pain occurs in the area of the anus, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and not with wine, and this is ancient (practice). Therefore, you should purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; and then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicine or cauterize with fire.
Sir, according to two well-known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area near the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner, and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of a finger, whether the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed halfway up the ankle, as there are four of them.
And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of ankle dislocation, which should be a continuous and burning circle around the entire ankle.
And this is the method of cauterization for gout when the pain is limited to the ankle and does not extend into the hip.
However, if the pain extends into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip in the place where the patient turns towards the pain; and with one cautery on the knee, about four fingerbreadths below the patella.
And if the cautery tool is a blade, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
And if the patient reports that the pain has spread to other parts of the body besides the feet, then cauterize those areas as well with a pointed cautery, using three or four points, or more if necessary.
And if the patient reports that the pain extends to the thighs, then cauterize those areas with a blade cautery.
And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn the nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, so that you do not harm the patient or cause complications.
And I have seen one or two cases where they cauterized on the ankle and ended up burning through to the bone, and the foot became swollen with inflammation until it was completely rotten. And as a result, a severe case of abdominal pain followed, and then death.
And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said about cautery with water, which is done in this way: make a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be half the size of a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of a fingertip bone or a little less.
And within that circle there should be another third; and the space between them should be the length of the night of the peacock; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these chains should be one night or two nights, and make on these borders a decent iron fence around the circles; and this is its shape:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks, and then it should be placed on the open side of the ulcer, with the patient lying on their left side. And therefore cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; and then apply a bandage to it, leaving the wound open for too many days; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi says: O, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of its consequences and because few people know how to care for it.
But with the other cauteries, those who have suffered from them find relief with that.
But the cautery with adherent medicines should be made in two circles having a perforated arm, through which is placed the handle of an iron rod; let the length of the wall be two nights or whatever it may be.
And if the space which is between each finger of the hand is opened below and above, and they contain themselves between them in this manner:
And then place the patient lying on their side on the bed, and press your hand over the ankle area; and then take some warm water and pour it between two circles, and let its heat increase gradually, and keep that for the duration of one hour, and endure the patient's biting and burning — because this bite is like that of fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the warm water from the ankle with cool water.
And then let it be for three days and place a compress on it until the blackness of the burn has subsided, and leave that for several days, and it will become itchy; this is called "jaundice.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make a statue for him that contains water, as is done with the foot.
And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for lye and quicklime, equally divided into two parts, grind them together and place in a new bladder through which a small hole is made, according to the amount that enters his vein.
And place the bottom of that bladder inside another bladder, and pour over it lye and quicklime two parts of soft water which covers those by one finger's width, and once you have pressed them with your hand for a good compression, allow the sharp water to descend from his vein into the other bladder.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over renewed quicklime and lye, because at this time it will have a very strong caustic effect, which is used in many medical operations and for cauterizing other members, since the operation is of fire.
And in this manner with some medicines with which one is cauterized, such as resin and melted honey and soap, thus mixed together.
And Gualterus recounts from an ancient author the operation and treatment with which is cured pain of water and sciatica vein, and he says that nothing better can be done for this, and he says that no other treatment is needed, and because it is cured once as it is recounted, for strongly as that enters into the bath, immediately it goes out from him.
And let it be taken from the common henbane plant; if green is not found, take a fresh fig; both should be crushed with a little gray salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the hip, or on the thigh, and let it be bound.
And let it be left in place for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the swelling.
And then immediately have that person bathe and once their body is warmed, let them enter the sun, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that one should not use cautery with these remedies except after the body has been purged.
But Escorides said that when the vein is cauterized with the goat's hair, it benefits more; and let the cautery be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.  (Note: "Escorides" refers to Dioscorides, a Greek physician and botanist)
And then take dry goat's hair and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool, pressing until it is extended. Based on the given context and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation for the new sentence:
And this method of cauterization is called "cautery of cows".
"Chapter XLIV.
"On the Cauterization of Back Pain
"Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various reasons such as falling, hitting, or excessive discharge, and similar causes due to the infusion of cold and wet substances.
"And one should not perform cautery except for this specific type, which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
"Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar remedies, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its length. Then, with a tent in each line, cauterize as much as needed, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the treatment.
"And let the cauterization be done using a pointed cautery tool.
"And if you wish, perform cauterization with three or four cauteries, using a medium-sized pointed cautery like this:
"Chapter XLIII.
"On the Cauterization of the Onset of Jaundice
Based on the provided context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's translate the sentence:
And you find in the lower spine of the back and in the knots that are already beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery as follows: that takes the cautery around the entire vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the edge of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three times. And let the points be close to each other.
And then treat the area so that it is healed with what we have said.
But be careful not to administer cautery in a case of swelling caused by a nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when this pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated and the pains are not removed, then cauterize them.
And you should cauterize that area of evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries. ‌
And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery. If the pains rise into the joints or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that [joint] on each side with three or four complete cauteries using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to make more cauteries than these, then cauterize that [area] and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand; just surround the tip of the cord.
And if the pain spreads into the joint and back, then administer the cautery which we mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called suagra, then make points along the circumference of the fingers as they turn, making points on these two lines.
And if any pains remain in the fingers, then make points along the circumference of each finger and at the tip of the hand.
And if the pain spreads to the elbows or muscles after several days, then cauterize each of them completely from all sides.
And you do not evacuate the patient by good management and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good management and the inflammation is removed by this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines protrude through the hernia, and this begins to happen, then you must tell the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle remedies so that the opening of his abdomen.
Then follow the patient closely between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is expelled or the hernia or intestines appear.
Then return with these words and signs, trying to cauterize the rupture on the bone of the pubis, indicating the point where it is similar to the width of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:
until it is very hot and throws off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
It seems like you've already provided a translation for the sentence:
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And observe wisely the position of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn that intestine, causing death or other great harm to come upon the patient.
And know that when using the cautery, if you avoid the bones, your procedure will not be successful.
And it is necessary for the cautery used on children to be delicate according to their age and size.
And then care for the area of the cauterization for three days with bandages until the scab from the fire has been removed.
And then treat him with other ointments until he is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, so that the site and the wound may be sealed.
And it is necessary to regulate his nourishment according to the length of time of his treatment, which will prevent his stomach from becoming full and keep the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a properly prepared diet, and let him have that for another forty days.
And he should be restricted from work and excessive food and drink, and from loud voices, because if he follows this complete regimen of healing, he will certainly be cured.
And I will explain the treatment of hernias in other parts of the abdomen, and at first, if you do not want them to return, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its size; and whatever is extruded from the cavity should be treated as described in the third part; and then treat it with what we have said, and it will be effective.
And some say that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is indicated by experience.
And a line is placed that goes along the latitude on the back above the hernia, and another line above it; and you place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter 46
On Cauterization for Testicular Swelling
When in certain members there is pain due to injury or bruising and this pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be appropriate for each member according to its size and smallness, and the location of the swelling and pain.
Therefore, if the first cautery heals him, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on him; for it is customary for those pains to be punctured from one member to another that is closest to it, so you must reach those with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47
On Cauterization for Leprosy
Lepers are sometimes treated with cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
Therefore, when you wish to cauterize such a person, consider if the leprosy is common and that type has been treated with water as we have said in the division, and it does not spread. However, if it does spread, be afraid for the patient that the corruption may encompass all of his body and all of his complexion; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, a second lower than that, reaching to the end of the hair; and two on both temples; and one behind, either on the nape or on the occipital protuberance.
And finish by applying the cautery to his head a little until it presses on the bone with a slight impression, and from there the scabies should be removed, so that the expiration of gross vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the spleen as necessary.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole of the foot.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the chest.
And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery itself, just like they do in their sleep, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and the joints, as previously stated in the description of the tools.
Then care for the cautery with bran mixed with honey and with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII
On Cauterization for Stroke.
When some member is benumbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that benumbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the cord a little. Then care for that with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes a certain numbness is cauterized which extends to the hands and feet, as well as the vertebrae of the back, and after cutting the nerves that move that limb, the numbness is removed.
But do not presume about this unless one who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the pathways of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX
On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Malignant
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery for a short period until the whiteness and the redness of it are removed, and its color is changed.
And then it is cared for with a mixture of barley flour and lentils with rose oil and hart's-tongue leaves, and with pigeon blood or sparrow blood, each being one part and all mixed together, and then a cloth is dipped in it and placed on the area until it is healed.
Chapter LI
On the Cauterization of Crabs (scabies).
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it turns.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle; however, I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids
When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excessiveness of them, or to the state of the patient, who is old and feeble, with little blood, or due to the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; and afterward leave it alone so that it may hasten in maturation.
But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape resembles it; and place that in the middle of the hemorrhoid until the core is penetrated.
And if you cauterize in that place which is lower, it is to relieve the arm's body; and then heal the inside part so that it may be healed.
Chapter .52
On Cautery for Erosion
Erosion is the progressive destruction of a member, which eats away at it like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that erosion in a place where it is suitable to apply cautery with fire, then heat up the cautery needles very few and large, according to what is appropriate for that place where there is erosion.
And then cauterize it completely from all sides until you have removed all the erosion and there is no trace of it left.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places a bandage of cloth soaked in oil until all the scabs are completely removed and all corruption is gone.
Then heal that with flesh-generating ointment.
But if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery on those places where it is still corrupt.
And it is treated with some sharp medicine because that is similar to a cautery. However, cauterization with fire is more effective for the cure of pus.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so take it when you need it for him.
Chapter 53.
On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Often it is observed that in the parts of the foot of a sick person there are wounds called "wounds", which are deep and cause pain; and these are cauterized in two ways: by cautery with fire and by cautery with hot water.
However, the fire cautery is that you heat the cautery in a similar way to a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the wound on all sides, and it should be of thin edges.
Then place that heated cautery on the wound and turn your hand with the cautery around the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound. And leave it there for three days until it begins to form a scab. Then bandage it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the bandage on overnight, for that will remove its causes.
And then care for the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many veins appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery with water on those areas. Take a small metal or iron tube or goose quill, and place it over the nail; next, pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, hold the tube with your hand, and roll it gently all around the affected area, pressing the edges of the tube against the skin surrounding the nail. The hot water will penetrate through the pores in the skin; let the patient endure the heat for about an hour, then remove the tube, as the nail with its root will have been eradicated.
And do this for each affected area until you have treated all such areas on the body.
Then care for those pustules whose root hairs have been eradicated with the waters of ointments that stimulate flesh growth.
Chapter 3
On the Cauterization of Tremors.
When someone experiences tremors due to nerve damage or fever of the same cause, or for a similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra; and with cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using olive oil cautery.
And the tremor will subside, hastening the healing of the diseased condition.
Chapter 50.
On the cauterization of white (leukoderma) lesions on the body.
When white spots appear on the body and become pustules or cracks formed from thick, corrupt materials, it is necessary at the beginning of their appearance to cauterize over each lesion with a subtle cautery made of myrtle stalk, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with a long surgical needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize these lesions at the beginning of their emergence in this manner; and they are not aggravated, and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they heal from them.
However, it is necessary to do this after bloodletting.
Capitulo LVI.
De la cauterización del flujo de sangre causado por un corte con un arco.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
When this happens to someone, then you take the arrow with your hand at the opening of the wound, and press over it with your thumb until the flow of blood stops under your thumb, and it does not come out.
Then place in the fire the olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, by the count of twelve, and blow on them until they are all ignited.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the location and the wound where the artery has been cut; quickly apply it to that vein after you have removed your thumb, and hold the cautery until the blood is sealed and constrained.
And if the blood is still coming out of the artery's opening when you remove your thumb and take out the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from those that have been prepared in the fire, and continue doing this with one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, lest another ailment come upon the patient.
Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted, for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is stopped. Or let it be tied with thread or a ligature by strong pressure, or medicines should be applied to them which have the virtue of constricting the blood; and they should be strengthened with a cushion by decent compression.
It seems like you're trying to translate a medieval medical text. Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Of cutting and piercing and cupping and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter everything about illnesses in which it is appropriate to use a hot iron or cautery and combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of this, and the instruments necessary for it with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way, so that the seeker may find relief for what he has asked about.
And before I begin this, it is important, my son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is about the second part of what was in the first chapter on cautery.
And because it is necessary to have great caution in this, since in the operations which are frequently carried out in this chapter, which involve evacuation with blood (which contains life), you must be careful not to pierce a vein or make an incision on an abscess or open an ulcer or clean a wound or extract an arrowhead or remove a stone and similar procedures. And of all those is accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for sometimes a person with mild symptoms may have many serious illnesses. And of them there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be light for him, the death, because of the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
And among them is one who gives you his possessions and goods, for whom you are waiting in good health; but his illness is pernicious.
Therefore, it is not wise to agree with someone who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your generosity and greed; do not assume any cause without proven knowledge that confirms what is best for you, and to whom a praiseworthy succession will come.
And use in the care of all your sick patients prognosis and diagnosis to guide you towards health, for in that lies your help in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
"Oh, children, may God inspire in you his understanding and not remove your direction and protection, for that is in his hands.
"And I have organized this chapter, distinguishing it into sections following the previous chapter on cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, so that what you ask for and need may be made easier for you.
"First Chapter.
"On the treatment of water contained in a child's head.
"Know that this illness, which is often seen in children, comes from birth and when the nurse tightly holds the child's head without loosening it.
"And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not understood.
"However, I have only seen this illness in children; and in all of those whom I have seen, death has followed, and thus it seems to me that their fate is sealed.
"And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water had their head continually enlarged until they could not bear themselves because of the size of their head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by fire.
And this moisture is accumulated either between the tendon and the bone or beneath the bone on the hip.
Because the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with a slit in the length, and let the length of the slit be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore if the moisture is more abundant and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and the water is pressed out when you press it with your hand from within and nothing is hidden from you. It is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
And then extract all the moisture at the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and plasters; and then pour water on it from above with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandages and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of making an incision, which considers where the abscess appears and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the frontal area, or on the right side, or on the left side; therefore, you should make the incision where the abscess and the water collection appear, and do so as best as possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and cause the patient to die from loss of blood and moisture.
Chapter Two
When there is some catarrh or pain in the eyes or feet, and it is persistent and does not respond to medication, then the final treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise those [arteries], the patient should raise their head and you should rub the area with rough cloth until the arteries are visible. Then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; consider where the vein pulses, and on each side of the temples near the ears, press firmly until they disappear in some people.
And then you should sign on the bowstring with a marker, and then make an incision in each [place?] with the sharp end of each blade, so that it penetrates into the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the blade under the artery and cut it at the incisions on top of the areas [affected].
And let the length of the incision be equal to two fingers' breadths, because when a vein is cut, blood exits with pulsating ejection, which jumps out frequently with each jump.
But if the bowstring does not appear at the incision, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then sign with a marker, and go into the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be removed is one-sixth of a measure, and it should be removed from him more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his bowstring.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if something remains on the bone that looks like a chip, then incise it so that it does not become an infected abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and cloth bindings of linen, and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 3:
On the removal of arrowheads that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from an ancient or acute migraine due to moisture and quality in the temples of the head, or a very intense old swelling similar to these, and it is not cured with the usual medical treatments, then we use in these cases the removal of arrowheads from the temples, or cauterization as we have shown.
And the way to perform this operation and removal is that the patient shaves the hair from their temples; and direct your attention to the apparent arrowhead in the temple because it is shown to you by its own pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to intense cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arrowhead appears clearly to you. And then you take the spatula which has this form: And then you strip the ligament with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then pour oil on it and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the ligament and discover it from under the tunics, from every side.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the instrument, and then cut off a piece according to the length by which its extremities are lengthened and narrowed, and there will be no blood flow, because if they are not cut off, the blood will not rise completely.
And then evacuate some blood, one to three times.
And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread or long cords, and do not cut off the putrefaction before the healing of the wound so that there will be blood flow.
And then you cut the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or about another hour later.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a scalpel cautery until its extremities are cut, and it will remain in place for that same work.
And it is better that the patient has fever or is of inflamed complexion; because cautery is among those causes that help the drying humors, and therefore it is better in assistance.
And it is necessary to remove the arrowheads that have lodged in the ancient parts of the body, and then place them on cleanly made pillows, and then treat with dry medicines so that the flesh grows and bandages until it heals.
And if during this operation there is bleeding from the arrow wound, then quickly use cautery or apply something to stop the bleeding, and hold it firmly until the bleeding stops. And if none of these causes is present, then place your finger on the wound until the blood clots, and rinse the wound with very cold water until the pain subsides, and bandage it as necessary.
And this is easier for the removal of an arrow: you should cauterize the vein with this double-edged cautery, having first tested both spots with a probe, and then place each, very hot, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between them is lengthened, because they are not completely healed by this cautery. ➤
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it should be the sharpness of two identical needles. However, if they have less sharpness than two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, you may cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since in those (instruments) there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is retained within them and the flesh is cut more gently.
And this work is better for all works and lighter too.
And let the space be between two needles the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On the care for bodies with sharp and acid tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are on the forehead outside the head, and there is no reason to apply any medical treatment in this case, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants walking, and the eyes of such patients become exhausted and wet to the point that their eyelashes are stuck together, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancients used to treat this condition with surgery, and they called this treatment "spassa.
And it is that you order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three equally spaced incisions in the forehead according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: let the first incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the eyelids that are on the lacrimal gland, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incisions of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three digits wide.
And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth with which to dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two pointed ends, and this is how its incision will be: which begins at the temples and goes to the second incision. Then draw back with it all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone on top of which it lies, and then do this from the middle incision down to the second incision. And then approach this space and insert into the first incision another time an additional instrument, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the edge of that sharp instrument against the flesh next to the vein, and the other edge into the bone, and use this to reach the urethral fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But let the incision continue until it reaches the vein, and then make this in the urethral fissure into another fissure.
And after a quantity of blood has flowed out, squeeze the places of the frozen blood clots.
Then place in each incision a piece of old cotton cloth, and place on those poultices soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and see that it does not become an abscess cautiously.
And on the third day, remove the bandages and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment made from basil, rose oil, and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V
"On the care of tears through catharsis and the flow from the inner parts of the head.
"When someone has sharp and persistent catharsis, and the eyes of the patient are sometimes exhausted to the point of being small, and their attention is weakened, and the eyelids have ulcers with hair loss, and there is a sharp pain in the front of the head with consequent outflow, then you should know that these substances and catharsis come from small veins originating from within.
"And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, a small one in length (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand from the temples' sides which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
"Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or linen bandages. "And then secure it on top with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that it does not become a cautious abscess.
This text seems to be describing the care for an ulcer or wound where pus (apostema) has already started to form and reduce. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Chapter VI
Of the care of those who have cataracts in the ears.
Every cause that affects the ears is one of four kinds, for it can be a mineral substance such as stone or something similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it can be from a plant such as sesame or bean, or it can be a fluid substance such as water and vinegar or their likenesses, or some animal.
Therefore, when a stone or another cause similar to those mentioned above affects the ear and does not fit or grow in the ear, place the ear toward the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip onto it some oil of violets or sesame, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze with condiments, and open the nostrils for the occurrence of sneezing. Then place around the edge of the ear some weights made of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its original position above, because many times it has been expelled by these means.
And if it is not expelled, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called "gesti epicicarios subtil," which has this form:
And if it is forgotten with a gesture, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle ounce, repeated twice.
And if it is not forgotten by this means, then make a needle of iron and insert the end of the needle into the opening of the ear canal, and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that only the needle remains open. And then extract it from your body with strong force, as we have advised above.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of hawk's fat or goose grease, with which birds are caught, a small quantity, and place that at the tip of a reed, and then wrap around that well-placed knot. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And so if it is not forgotten by all the means we have mentioned, then cut off that part before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and draw blood according to their strength, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the ear to the sides above, and then make a small slit in the edge of the ear towards where the pus is most pressing. And if the crack is of lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the crack at that moment with speed, and treat it until it heals.
And if the cause of the problem in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you upon examination, then take a thin spatula according to this form: And administer with that the removal of that grain which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place a small weight on it, and then extract it with tweezers or a thin hook, or as we have said, because its removal is facilitated.
But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning with conditions, and fill his ear with some old cotton, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if by this means it is expelled, good; and if not, then take thin stones like pebbles according to the length of the finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and have the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and jump over one foot from that side and strike with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. The translation of "Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada" into English is:
The translation of "Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada" into English is: And already the water has been poured into a container from which you should take paper or cotton wool, and place one end of it in the ear, while extending the other end with fire until it is burned at its tip.
And then place another cotton wool and do this until all the water has been poured out, and press it with a probe as mentioned above for the stone-extracting pouch.
But in the case of an animal entering that ear, if it is a small creature, similar to a flea, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large creature that causes swelling inside the eardrum, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the cause of it will be lighter than all other cases that occur in the ear.
But in the case of removing a worm born inside the ear, when you treat it with the water as mentioned in the division and the distillation treatment, and your cure does not succeed, then you must look at the ear in sunlight.
And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then remove it with tweezers or fine scissors; but if no cause appears, then take a probe that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape. And insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out with it strongly and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
But if the patient does not comply with your request, then you should seal the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distilled remedies that the ancients have already proven effective for treating worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your infusion be the one with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is the shape of it: And make that of silver or copper, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And thus it should be packed with cotton so that it fits into the hollow of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its tip neatly with cotton, then put oil or the juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you choose from these into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted in the ear should be carefully scalded with a small amount of fire. And be careful that the substance you distill into the ear is not too cold, for medications for the ear do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII
On the care of earaches.
Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this also happens in some men; an obstruction occurs in the meatus of the ear due to a disease or a piece of flesh stuck there. And this obstruction is sometimes located at the pore of the auditory canal which does not recognize its limits, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the pore of it, which does not comprehend its limits, is in the greatest difficulty to heal.
And in that which reaches the limit, it is necessary for you to place the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And then if you see an apparent obstruction, open it with a fine probe which looks like this:
If the end of it, which has a narrow width, is such that one part is sharp and the other is not; and let the probe be two finger widths long, so as not to harm the ear.
And so if the opilacio is due to flesh growing in the ear or in its meat, then take it with fine scissors and incise it vigorously until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opilacio is in the bone of the ear, then take a fine iron needle and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert it into the meat of the ear.
And so if you find opilacio with water that the patient finds easily, due to the heaviness of hearing, try to relieve his pressure gently; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear cloth of the appropriate size according to the width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herb and dip it in vinegar, then pulverize it over the wound three times a day; and if you see the ear is already apostemated, then it is necessary that you remove the herb and replace it with another herb which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil until the apostema subsides; and then continue to treat it until it is healed.
"However, if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use another treatment that restricts blood flow, which is discussed in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
"On the care of sties that appear on the eyelids.
"Sties that appear on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.
"Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or fingers, and cut them off at the root with scissors, and then place on the areas something sharp.
"But if pain with blood flow comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle needle-like cautery.
"And the best cauterization is near the incisions, because if they are cut several times and there remains any cause of their roots, then when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX
"Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
"Many times something appears in the eyelids of the eyes that is caused by a hard and tough substance, and because of its size it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick fluid in the eyelids, both lower and upper.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider if the swelling in them comes from what appears to be coming out of the eyelid and is moving to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, cut along that swelling with a slit lengthwise, and then drain all parts of it easily until it becomes dry, and then suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
And if the swelling is large, then you adjust it with a stitch; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from that because the fluid of it heals that and cures it.
And if the swelling is extending into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should cut the inside surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a thread, or make another incision as needed, and press it from all sides. And if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, that will not matter for any reason.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area with water that penetrates until it is healed.
Chapter .x.
Of the treatment of an abscess on the eyelid above the wound.
An abscess is a growth that is generated in the layers of the eyelid above, and it is more common in children, causing their eyes to become inflamed and leading to cataracts in many cases; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather in their eyes.
And for this reason you see these children constantly squinting, and sleeping with their eyes squinted; and the humidity of their eyebrows on their eyelids has already caused inflammation, and the appearance of an impending abscess is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus inside.
And there is some way of operation that if the patient places his head on your lap, and you place a cloth over him and make a ring around the area containing pus from all sides, and then press it firmly with your fingers so that the pus accumulates in the middle of the ring, then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a spatula, cutting lengthwise, and the cut should not be larger than the cut made in bloodletting.
Here's a translation attempt for the given sentence:
"Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the specified parts outside and turn between your right and left hands until it is discharged.
"And be careful not to press into the opening, so that with the spatula you do not reach the smell and cause it to escape.
"But if it does not appear to you immediately at the beginning of the opening, then press gently into the opening until it begins to appear; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water with vinegar and place them on the area, securing them with bandages.
"And also sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the opening, so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
"Then care for it until it is healed.
"But if a hot abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with cold poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the Manner of Touching the Nose
When hairs are born under the eyelids due to unnatural growth and have been there for some time, they irritate the eye and cause various ailments such as excessive tearing and softening of the eyelids, until it becomes a serious problem for the eye, which is called touching of the eye. It is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine, as was said before in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with needles, as I will explain.
Based on the context and similarities with the provided translation, here's my line-by-line attempt at translating the given sentence:
Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then open with the spatula over both lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear duct into the lesser tear duct. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a king's hand.
Then place a hook in one of the two angles of the anus, and excise it completely, and then use the thread to join the two lips with honey or fine wool yarn, and clean the blood, and make adhere what exceeds from the threads on two eyebrows with some sticky substances, if you want to do this, otherwise don't worry about it.
Then let the thread stitches dissolve within three or four days, and then heal that.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without stitches, and treat it with something that dries and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the closure of the wound and its accumulation; but stitching is better, therefore I say this as well, according to the old ways of treating.
However, be careful with the patient, and it is a good operation, and there should be no fear in this matter.
And there is another way of treating it, which is to mark on the eyelid a figure similar to a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three hooks placed together and arranged in this manner:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then carefully close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and ensure that it is healed inside as well.
But if an abscess occurs, you should make an incision or a puncture in it; then seal the abscess with wax and similar substances, and apply ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs turn inward, then you should use water on it for the incision as we said before; but stitches in each case are more artificial.
To treat with canes is done like this: And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the shape inside according to what I have said; then make two canes or two thin needles, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be less than the width of a spoon. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each partition where you place the threads.
Then you add each one with delicacy above the water that overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canes of each partition with strong force, and leave it for some days, because the cord through the constriction will die and become soft and will fall off by itself until it falls out on its own.
If it is delayed, then break the fast with the toads, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the way to make two reeds according to this form: and let there be the amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About removing stinging hairs from the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and stinging in the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in that same thread of silk or linen, and immediately you should adjust the tips of it and insert them in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be about one palm.
And immediately you should weave another fine thread under it in a short time, and knot the tips of that one if you wish to do so.
And immediately make the patient sit in your chair, and let it be near the window so that your work may be seen clearly, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
Based on the context and similarities to modern Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Here is a possible translation of the given sentence into English:
Based on the pattern of the previous translations, here's my attempt at translating this line:
Sure, let's translate that line by line:
And you will see that with the eye of the wound, because then you will throw away the splint and the bandage, and each and every one will close their eyes, and leave the keys for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is too short, then you should attach a long natural hair to it and raise it with that, or leave it until it has lengthened to an appropriate amount of space, and then you can raise it.
**Chapter XIII.**
About the treatment for cataracts that appear on the upper eyelid.
When cataracts appear in the eye and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upward, or to the right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or cut or from cautery, this condition is called leporine cataract. This cataract, whether natural or accidental, is caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or from cautery, or by similarity to their unfortunate state.  (The original text seems to be describing different causes for the same condition.)
The manner of operating on it is to cut through that scar tissue and separate the lips (of the wound), and place a wick of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary that you use a cure for him due to the causes that dry out and constrain, because if you do this, it will return worse than ever before.
Use one of the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with altea and li seeds, or use an ointment made from dyacolon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all skill that which is not solidified according to the form as it was at first.
And this operation which we have mentioned is none other than the correction of alicrato that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV
On the care of hecrato, which is made in the eyelid below.
This hecrato which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called hecrato; and it is either natural or accidental.
But accidental is caused by a wound or a cut or by cautery or by other similar things.
And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then you extend the skin to the openings with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut through with a broad blade. And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, that is good; and if not, take the rod and place it on the split area, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the side of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two corners of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let them form an angle until, when they come together, they form a figure of their own.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
Then remove that piece of skin by the width of the needle's tip below it, so that it becomes the eyelid.  (In this context, "ostar" means to cut away or remove.)
Then join the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then heal them with the water we mentioned for softening medicines and compresses until they are healed.
And if elevation is necessary through an incision or suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision on the eyelids following what has been mentioned before. And then separate with your thumb between two lips as we have said.
In summary of the discourse on elevation, whether above or below, let the operation proceed as prepared for the type of elevation, and that is in various forms.
And the skilled craftsman always prepares an engine in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, according to what is convenient for the patient with regard to the operation and instruments in the best arrangement.
Chapter XV
Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this adhesion happens to some men so that the eyelid is stuck to the white of the eye and its movement and natural function are impeded, then it is necessary for you to insert the end of a reed under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with honey.
And then you should carefully incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula that is not sharp like a scalpel, but rather blunt with a slight edge to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation. Leave the spatula so it does not cut the skin with its sharpness.
And let your incision be so that it easily separates that adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it; or distill on it some juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with some wool dipped in egg white, and place it on the eye. On the third day, use cauterizing treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI
Of the incision of a nail and of the excess flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that there are two types of nails: either they are nervous, similar to thin dry bark; or they are not nervous, similar to white frozen moisture. When it affects the nail, it is forcibly taken with pincers and cut, and the pincers should not be inserted into it.
E amb les dues espècies, no comencen fins que el làcrim major entra petit a petit i cobreix la vista, impedint-ne la llum i el moviment.
E la manera d'actuar en l'inici és que el malalt posi el seu cap en les teves mans, després obri els ulls i elevi la parpella amb la teva mà, i després reculli la ungla amb una petita quantitat de dobleció i estenqueu-la sobre les parts superiors. I then take a needle and insert a horsehair or cowhair or similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it over the upper parts, and peel off the skin of the nail which is the pupil. I seguiràs amb el fil a través del darrere del dit.
Després tallaràs el romanent a la base del làcrim amb un bisturí fi o tisores petites, i netejaràs la carn del làcrim natural per evitar que en l'iniciació no es produeixin llagrimes contínues.
And sometimes the nail is extended or protruding with a pincer, as we have said. Then it should be cleaned with a surgical blade of this form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal membrane with the surgical blade, as this could cause a tear and result in a punctured pupil.
Then insert into the eye a small amount of crushed salt or sieved chalk, and leave it there until the next day; then cleanse it with water until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle into it, or if it is stuck in that way, then many times this type of nail can be cured with medicine and healed as I have recounted in the division.
And if you wish to cut it [the nail], then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle surgical blade of great sharpness, according to this form: with finesse. And if it is seen that the nail is thin and twisted and caught in the corner of the eye, then drip into the eye some chalk dust or sieved chalk or crushed salt from your mouth, and close the eye until the next day.
And first perform the operation until all that belongs to him is removed, except if a contrary abscess is present in the eye, for then you leave it and initially treat the abscess until it is healed.
And perform your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear-producing flesh, if noticed in the eye causing great damage, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut a portion of it, but do not complete the cut to avoid cutting into the flow of tears.
And then apply to the tear duct rose oil and sage until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the cutting of cataracts and on what is born from flesh adhered to the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is born and covers the pupil, or it adheres closely to the eyelids and tightly compresses the eyelids to their outer parts, resembling a row of balusters.
But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then you open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, taking it with a forceps or tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And it should be your incision with which you cut those or with a spatula that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which a splinter is collected according to what will come later in this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with crushed salt or sprinkle in it powdered vitriol and similar substances from corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outwardly cotton soaked in egg white until it is secure against pus.
And if there remains any cause of guarding and the wound is secure from blood, and you fear pus, then leave the wound open and treat that pus with water that promotes the discharge of pus, and afterwards repeat the operation until it is healed. Similarly, do this for flesh that becomes attached in the wound of this kind.
However, you should ensure that all care of the fresh wound be done by natural means or accidental, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is tolerating the operation.
It seems like you are referring to the chapter or section number. "Capitol" is an archaic spelling of "chapter". So, "Capitol .xviii." would mean "Chapter XVIII" or "Chapter 18".
This phrase seems to be discussing the collection of pus in a wound. Let's break it down:
"Know that there are veins called 'testudo' located on the head, and by preventing them from performing their function, they cause blindness for several days.
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the head in which there is blindness is strong and has no other ailment besides blindness. If that is the case, then collect the blindness.
"And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two according to your judgment; and let that hook be of fine double silk according to this form:
"or so that two hooks gradually come together in one place according to this form:
"And then those veins should be tied with fine forces, gently and skillfully, and let the blood be drawn little by little until you see that the veins are removed from the head and rolled up.
"And be careful not to touch the head with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is at noon before the sun, and you are very steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything except those veins.
"And when you have finished, then drip clear oil or juice onto the head, so that with its sharpness it may corrode what was removed from the blindness.
Here's the translation for the given text:
And then repeat the same procedure until the patient is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX
Chapter XIX: On reducing arytenoid dislocations of the nose.
When you treat arytenoid dislocations with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the previously mentioned procedure and it does not heal, do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the abscess until it is matured, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
It is called a pointed head, made of iron, with a rounded head like this, which should be made pointed by filing or carefully sharpening (as shown in the following figure).
Place that [instrument] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, pressing gently until you know that all the corruption has been scraped off.
And do this several times, then restore the area with drying and styptic agents.
When the wound has healed and good flesh has grown there, and the body has been cleansed of infection and remains so for forty days without recurrence or pus formation and no further incident occurs, then you know that it is cured.
If not, then it is not healed but rather the opening should be reduced to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: you uncover with a saw or sharp medicine, and after uncovering the bone, you take thread in this form:
Let the tip of the thread be triangular, and let the shaft of it first be tapered into the extremity like this:
Then place that over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little into the nostril, and then roll your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels this because they find relief as soon as you remove your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry it in this way:
Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed out to the parts returns to the nose, so it is lighter on the patient.
This appears to be the beginning of a chapter or section heading in a medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .xx." translates to "Chapter 20" in English. This indicates that what follows is the content of the twentieth chapter of the text.
This sentence likely refers to a medical procedure involving the reduction of a dislocated or displaced part of the body, specifically the hip (huel). Here's a line-by-line translation:
When the swelling appears in its entirety and does not diminish or worsen during the treatment, then you should let the patient go, and then follow them, and then place ventozas on the neck without scarification and suck out well; and then apply liniment to the swelling which is made of acetum (vinegar), aloe, enses (honey?), and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
The method for the powders is to take many sheets of linen and fold each one into four layers, making many of them from these.
And then place those layers on top of each other according to the quantity that the swelling needs. And then strengthen on top of those with a hard cloth with strong tightness; and repeat the ventozas with suction without scarification; and then remove the ventozas and let the swelling be tight day and night.
But if during this time the ligament has softened, then it should be very tight.
And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if you see that the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and the tightness and the ventozas until it is healed.
**Capítulo 21.**
**Sobre el comienzo de la prominencia del vítreo.**
**Cuando ocurre una ruptura en el vítreo y se prominente y sobresale de los párpados como un grano de rábano, y la forma del hombre está distorsionada por esto, y deseas cortarlo, entonces la operación sobre él es así como hemos descrito: tú insertas la aguja en la raíz del vítreo desde abajo hacia arriba, y luego metes otra aguja desde el lado del lagrimal, que sea doble de la primera, e inserta aquella y deja la primera aguja según su disposición; entonces cortas el lugar del hilo doble y levantas con esto la parte del vítreo alrededor de la aguja, y fortaleces esa acción.**
**Luego, retiras la aguja y colocas encima un algodón empapado en clara de huevo, y dejas que el hilo caiga con la parte del vítreo.**
**Luego, curas la herida con un ungüento que fortalezca hasta que la enfermedad se cure.**
This sentence appears to describe a medical procedure involving the treatment of an eye issue. Let's break it down line by line:
And soon he will be strengthened to heal.
Chapter XXII
On the treatment of cataracts.
This illness, which is called cataracts, is not simply watery fluid that descends into the eye like tears, but it is something else.
However, the way to deal with it is to have the patient sit on a straight and prepared chair, then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you can see the fluid coming out of the lower parts, and quickly dry it so that it does not descend further and block the light, and thus the patient will be able to see the causes as they are seen.
And if it does not come down, know that it is just water.
But if the descent of the fluid is not prepared with water as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and quickly take a thin spatula and use it to scrape the membrane slightly below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunica in the corner (where it should go), until the fluid is removed.
Therefore, once it is removed, then you should drip warm water into the eye, in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then heal with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of water descending from the belly.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones need to be punctured, as we have explained, according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their belly tightly with a cord.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their belly, if the belly in which the water is located is on the left; or with your right hand, if it is on the right.
And then with your right hand take almonds, if the belly is on the left; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
And then place the tip of an almond near the crown of the head through the thickness of the eyeball from the side of the tear duct, and then peel the almond with virtue and roll your hand with that.
And then penetrate into the eyeball of the belly and feel that the almond has already arrived at the desired place. 👉 Continue translating?
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you should remove that other time before the wax is poured.
And so, when it is dry and does not descend, then you should extract the wax with ease, and roll it a little at a time in your hand, and then dissolve a little salt in water and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound cotton or linen soaked in rose oil and egg white, and moisten the wound with water.
But we and those of our time use powdered sugar mixed with egg white on it.
And if your wax does not obey the inside of the wound due to its hardness—for there are some men whose wounds are very hard—then you should take the spatula which is called alabaster, and this is its form:
And so pierce with it that place, and do not end your hand in the hole, but only make a subtle way for the wax to enter its location.
Then introduce the wax as we have said.
And you must complete your work by preparing the patient's bedroom so that it is dark and quiet, and have him sleep on his back without moving.
And press on the patient's nature so that it may be softened and not move its head to the right or left of everything.
And let the bandage be according to his disposition within three days.
And then release him from that dark and profound sight, make him see some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.
And it is not necessary to do this during the hours of the cure or immediately after the infusion. It is necessary that you delay this because water can slightly change due to great and intense regard.
But if an abscess forms, then it is necessary to release the humors before seven days, and correct this with water that reduces the abscess.
Then you close the patient's sight and place on his face a golden plate so that his vision may be controlled for some days, leaving him in the most profound darkness.
And then he is gradually brought out of this darkness and returned to his normal state.
And know that in alchemy the student is not exempt from some vision tests, and then you shall be bold in performing the operation.
And it has come to our attention from some of those who are at the Artach, and someone said that he made fire in the Magdam Ayrac, which is pierced with the tool used to draw water.
But nevertheless I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the types of pumps, for the person who does not know them:
And they are made of iron or steel, and their tips should be fashioned with this subtlety: triangular, with a sharp point, as is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh eaten away in the nose.
When in the nose there arise diverse growths of flesh, some of which have a cause similar to that of scorpion fish poison, or like a sea anemone; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that fish. And of it is cancerous flesh, white, of dark color; and of it is the lion's flesh, not of dark color.
Based on the provided context and similarities to medieval medical texts in related languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence: The text seems to be a medieval medical instruction regarding the extraction of something from the body parts. Here is the line-by-line translation: The text seems to describe a medieval medical procedure involving the treatment of an abscess or boil (apostema) that is filled with blood or pus. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then place a little vinegar or water in the nostrils. But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the palate, then know that he has been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inside there is flesh rotting in the upper nasal bones which have not been reached by the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into him, which has some thickness, and apply the fingers of your hands between each knuckle the amount of the said or less, and you instruct the patient and insert one end of the fat into the nose with the finger or with another tool that he can use.
And after he has done this, let him send his odorant into it until it reaches the nasal passages and comes out on his throat, for many times children do this in school, and it is an easy task for anyone who wants to do it.
And then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a meat clamp with your fingers that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the fingers of the fat.
And then extract the bile, and place in the nose near the blood vessel a clove, and do this for three days or more until the ointment completely dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you decide on a drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument called an oil still, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open oil lamp, also like a small bowl, and the opening similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the oil still should be flat, open; at the end of which there is a handle with which you hold it when you pour into it oil or water that you want from the juices and the suckable causes.
Based on the provided text, it seems like the treatise is discussing medical procedures and conditions. The sentence "Capitol .xxv." appears to be indicating a chapter or section number in Roman numerals.
The text you've provided seems to be written in a language that is a blend of Old French, Spanish, and Latin. Let's break down the sentence and attempt a translation:
Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
And for this reason, you should note down everything at the beginning of their appearance, and write it all down. Then place over the area either the cautery or the burning medicine that was in its place.
But if your writing is delayed until it becomes inflamed, then consider whether it is hardened, tough, of dark color and has little sensation. Do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous abscess; many times it has been seen that whoever writes about this abscess experiences great harm upon the one whom they have written about.
And if the abscess is from a blow and not of dark color, and it is possible to write about everything, then evacuate the patient and write about it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the stitching of the nose and lips and ear when their continuity has been dissolved by a wound or something similar.
Know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, little should be done in that operation except for some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary for someone due to some reason, consider if the wound is fresh with its blood, and then you should join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips of separation of continuity are already separated and each one is made whole, then it is necessary that you remove each part of its evident cord until blood comes out. Then join the two lips together with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them and let it dry, then place on the powder a thin plaster or any other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that ligature for two days or three, then remove it and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the sutures dissolve by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
However, the manner of stitching is to add the separation of continuity with needles in the same way as we have mentioned in the stitching of the belly, or join the separation of continuity with thread in the way that you know how.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the causes that appear on the two lips in the inner parts.
It often happens to many men in the inner parts of their lips that certain hard masses similar to bird droppings appear, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Sure, let's translate the text step by step:
Chapter 28.
On the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
When the gum flesh is tight and has more than one vein attached to it, which the ancients called albulus, you should suspend it with a thread or scissors, cut it according to its course, and let the pus or blood flow out.
Then place over the wound sage leaves or other styptic or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter 29.
On the reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth, whether they are missing or protruding, and the gums are tightly attached with rough, sharp edges, and some veins are blackened and yellowed or greenish until the gum is corrupted by this, then the teeth become loose.
And therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands and place their head in your lap, scrape the teeth on which those rough edges appear until there is no more cause for any of them, and this will remove the blackness and yellowing and the other discolorations until they are cleansed. ➤
Sure, I'll attempt to translate the given medieval medical text line by line:
And know that teeth require different shapes and many figures, according to the preparation of your operation. And because the razors with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used between the teeth in other forms, you should prepare these forms of razors, which you will see shortly.
Chapter .xxx.
On the extraction of teeth.
You should carefully remove the tooth from its pain with all effort and prepare thoroughly for its extraction, because there is no reason that justifies keeping it after extraction, since it is a sublime substance until it is removed.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth; if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed. We have already seen this in the practice of barbers.
Therefore, since you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and afterwards, make use of your said tools or fine forceps little by little until you reach it.
And now proceed to talk strongly and clearly with the patient, using firm language, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that you can hold it securely without causing any discomfort. Then carefully extract the tooth in a manner that ensures you do not break it and cause no greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it beneath the patient in such a way that you facilitate and aid in its removal as was done at first.
However, if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then you should fill the cavity with cloth and tighten it using a fine thread so that it does not break during your constriction with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act carefully with incisions around the entire edge of the gum and be mindful of your strength so that you do not break it and leave a part attached to the patient, which would cause more pain than before.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity regarding tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great injuries on the patients which are more difficult to heal, and all or some of these reasons may happen: that you extract the tooth with some bones from the jaw, as many times we have testified.
And for the removal of it, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar with salt.
And if there is bleeding through this, as with many wounds, then sprinkle some amount of dust and splash it on the wound. And if that does not work, use a cautery.
The shape of the forceps and fine-tipped tongs with which the tooth is pulled at first should be of long handles and short, thick bodies, so that they are not bent when you must work with them.
And thus as is the case with thick handles until when tightened with those they are not bent, the ends should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and with long handles, and at the ends of those there should be teeth which fit into each other and are tightened by constriction, and sometimes the ends of those should be in the shape of a stork's beak, which is curved, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from locked jaws.
When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any reason, it is necessary that you place cotton with borax on the area for one day or two until the area is softened; and then insert pliers or tongs whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called stork or heron, in the shape of forceps.
Their extremities should be made inside like a file or rasping tool.
And if you cannot extract the tooth with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you cut into the gum and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is this:
And it should have a short handle, not too large, and not be sharp to avoid breaking.
So if with this the gum is pierced, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is that of a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument should be that of a triangular and more slender extremity.
And now you are helped with this instrument, having two prongs, whose form is approximately as follows: And with other instruments that will be used for tooth extraction; because assistance is provided with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and this is its shape:
of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should be somewhat thick, and not beveled so that it is not blunt.
And know that the tooth extraction tools are similar to and as effective as other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in this craft finds for himself, according to what the operation and various diseases indicate to him; because there are diseases for which the ancients did not provide or name a specific instrument, due to the diverse forms of different species.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is crushed or broken, then it should be fixed in its place with something suitable from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for tooth extraction. And help yourself with the following gesture, which has this form:
And let it be of some small thickness, and let it be inserted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or move until the bone is completely mended; and then restore the place with suitable medicines.
"But if in the bone there is a small ulcer, then remove it along with its blackness, and treat it so that it may be healed.
Chapter 32
On the care of prominent teeth over others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural form, they can cause discomfort, especially in women and older individuals. Therefore, you should consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or file it down, then cut it off; but if it is attached to another tooth, then use this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's snout, made of very sharp Indian iron.
And your incision should be done over the course of several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are cut as well.
And if it is an exposed prominent tooth to filing, then file it with a file of very sharp Indian iron like this one:
And let all of it be made of Indian iron, and the handle evenly; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made. With this, the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is cut or damaged. "And then clean it at the end, and shave it with some razors.
"And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and the tongue touches it, then you should smooth that interior so that the roughness of that piece is removed and flattened, and filled in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not corrupted.
"Chapter .33.
"On restoring broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
"When teeth are broken or dislodged due to trauma or falling, and the patient cannot eat anything solid, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not fall out again, those which can be strengthened should be filled with gold, not silver; for silver turns black and becomes brittle after some days, but gold never changes.
"And the filling should be of such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the method of making it is that you take the filling material and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then you increase with two bends of the filling material between broken or multiple ones, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then carefully insert the instrument into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and caution until it is not damaged.
And use the string that you have reinforced to tie the sutures of the teeth so that they do not protrude.
And then cut the excess string with scissors or forceps and add them to each location discreetly, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue. And then leave it thus tied as is customary.
But if it becomes untied or broken, strengthen that or those with another string in such a way throughout the entire process.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as you see these tied together:
And when it is done that the tooth or teeth return to their respective places and are regrown as we have advised, and they heal.
And only do this if you are a skilled and wise craftsman.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use a bone of a cow for this purpose, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitolul XXXIV
Când inflamația limbii care vine în limbă, îți interzic să vorbești.
Această inflamație care vine sub limbă, unele ori este naturală și vine cu nașterea, alte ori este accidentală și se produce din cauza unei boli care a fost deja vindecată.
Operația constă în a introduce mâini pe bura pacientului, până ce ajungi la tavan gurii; apoi ridicați limba și aproape că arzi această inflamație nervoasă până când limba se va separa de tavanul gurii.
Dar dacă există și o duritate sau un nod, care este rezultatul unei boli îndepărtate, atunci tu trebuie să aplici ungere și să-l tai până când vei tăia inflamația și nodulul se va desface.
Fii atent să nu taieți țesuturile din piele și sângele nu curgă din acea tăietură.
Apoi spălă rănile tăieturii cu apă, vinagre sau apă clocotită; apoi pune un presupus sub limbă, care este o bucată de material pe care pacientul trebuie să-l țină sub limbă toată noaptea pentru a preveni reapariția inflamației.
But if there is a flow of blood, place crushed vitriol on the area; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with an antiquated cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And continue to treat with the other remedies until he is cured.
Chapter .35
About the removal of a swollen tongue.
Sometimes, under the tongue, there is an abscess resembling a small grape that prevents the tongue from functioning naturally; and it grows rapidly until it fills the mouth.
And the procedure is to open the patient's mouth, sitting in front of a light source and observing the abscess.
And if you see it is dark or black in color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it has turned white and contains fluid, then place your onion in it, and cut it with a sharp scalpel, cutting it from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, then place crushed zegi (a type of mineral) over it, which is vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work until you have finished with him, until he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for him with the other remedy until he is healed.
**Capítulo XXXVI.** (or Chapter 36)
**About the removal of pustules from both ears and those that are in the throat, as well as other pustules.**
**When it happens in the throat, they are called glands because they resemble cotton; these come out and are named pustules. When you cure them with the water we mentioned earlier and they do not heal, then consider if the pustule is hard, dark in color, and has little feeling; then do not touch it with iron.**
**And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the blood flow; rather, let it be until it matures, and then either you will draw it out or it will break on its own.**
**And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root is fine, then that is what needs to be incised.**
**And the operation on it is what you should consider: before your operation, see if the pustule has already stopped hurting or if it has diminished somewhat; then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be towards the east, and open his mouth, and a servant holding an instrument between his hands should press the patient's tongue down with a very noble instrument, the shape of which is as follows:**
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Therefore, when you press the tongue with it and the abscess is revealed to you, then place your instrument over it, take a needle and insert it into the opening, and draw out as much pus as you can from outside. Also, if you draw some of the tunic [membrane] out, then proceed to cut it with an instrument that looks like this:
Also, if you draw some of the tunic [membrane] out, then proceed to cut it with an instrument that looks like this: and it resembles forceps, but the tips of it are curved so that the orifice [opening] of one is in the middle of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula that looks like this: and it should be sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one tunic [membrane], proceed to cut the other in the same manner, and then the patient will heal from cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, heal with water from the decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar to those for cauterizing until the bleeding is stopped, and then care for it until it is healed.
And sometimes it appears on the throat, at other times on the tonsils or both of these areas, and you should cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two apples equally.
And I have treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which was black in color and caused little pain, but it had already closed her throat, causing the woman to breathe with great difficulty. I had already forbidden her from eating and drinking water, and she would have died within a day or two if I hadn't intervened.
And the abscess had swollen so much that it protruded from her throat through two openings.
So I made an incision with the fistula and inserted one of its tips into one of the openings, and pulled it out, along with a large piece of pus. Then I incised that opening to understand the other opening better, and then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue down, and inserted the tip of the fistula into the abscess.
And then I cut out a large piece of it, and only a little blood came out of it. Thus her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, and then ate food. I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess formed in its place, which I incised until it had grown longer than the original one.
Certainly! Let's translate the given text step by step:
**Capítulo .xxxvii.** (Chapter 37)
**Sobre la hinchazón del dedo cuando está inflamado.**
**Cuando el dedo está hinchado y la hinchazón es larga, se llama perpendicular. Y si la hinchazón es más gruesa en la parte inferior y redonda, entonces se llama quiste.**
**Pero cuando se cura con el remedio mencionado anteriormente y la hinchazón no desaparece, y cada vez que el quiste vuelve a aparecer y es delgado, entonces debes incisarlo para drenar el líquido. Y si la hinchazón es larga y tiene un color rojo oscuro o negro y no duele, entonces debes tener cuidado con la incisión, porque en ese caso hay peligro para el paciente.**
**Y cuando veas que el líquido es blanco y largo según lo que he descrito, entonces haz que el paciente se siente y presione su lengua con el instrumento adecuado para darle forma, y luego coloca una aguja en la nueva abertura y tira hacia abajo. Luego, incisa con uno de los dos instrumentos mencionados anteriormente.**
And it is important that you do not inject that substance unless it is appropriate for the patient's natural condition without addition, because if you inject too much, you will cause their speech to be impaired.
And for the injection, use the substance we have recommended for injecting two grains, and ensure that it is healed afterwards.
But if the patient is frightened by the injection, it is necessary to use cunning in his cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing him is only with sharp water. And you should place the patient's head on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier, and immediately take some of the water we have discussed in the chapter on cauterization, and perform the procedure with that living cause, placing it neither too thick nor too thin, and with this fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
The outer part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be concave like the bottom of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the palate. The patient should then move their tongue so that saliva or mucus flows from their mouth due to the action of the medicine, so that none of it runs down their throat and they do not swallow it.
And then take the medicine with your hand, and press it onto the uvula for half an hour until you see it become blackened and numb from the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the reed. Dip the cotton in the medicine and insert the reed with the cotton into a hollow cane until the cotton adheres to the cane. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the blister, then let it remain there so that it may dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. Then after cauterization, clean around the blister with cotton soaked in warm water and rinse the area with the water from the medicine. Wash it with cold water and treat it outside with an ointment and inside with poultices until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than cutting and takes longer to heal.
Sometimes the blister is healed with something that is more delicate than cauterization and incision, because it can be cured with sublimation in this manner: Take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried Arabian grapes, chamomile, broth of similar herbs, and mix all these things or some of them together in a pot. Soak them in vinegar and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with clay, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which an instrument should be placed in this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
And introduce the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula above the soft palate, until the uvula becomes somewhat blurred.
And repeat this process on the other joints until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, because it will aggravate the abscess, and you should only do this if you have the consent of the patient's guardian.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and place a hen's egg at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be covered, for the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .XXXVIII.
About the removal of thorns and water that stick to the throat and other causes.
Many conditions can affect the throat or cause pain, such as thorns in the feet or other issues.
Therefore, you should remove the visible water or other substance that appears to be stuck in the throat. To do this, press the tongue with an instrument facing the sun, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
And what is not apparent and remains hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you cause the patient to vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because quickly the associated cause will be expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or a lettuce leaf or a piece of dry bread; or let them take a piece of dried sponge, dipped well in honey, and then have the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns, they will be extracted. And take an eel and dip it well in honey, and let it remain inside the mouth until it is drawn out by vomiting; or take a leek and place it in the patient's mouth, then draw it out.
But if they are not expelled by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
And let it be as thick as a small ray, and on the end of it there should be a cavity which you can insert into his throat with ease.
And have him lift his head upwards, and be careful that the contact with his throat bone does not cause injury or dislodge a bone or thorn, or that which the physician removes with his hand.
Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of leeches attached to the throat.
When treating the leech with the water we mentioned in the division of care with medicines and not with cautery, consider first in the throat of the patient to the south, because you will press the tongue of the patient with the tool that we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers gently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech dies and comes out of the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a cup full of cold water and open the mouth of the patient into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of that water for any reason, and move the water with your hand for about an hour, because the leech as soon as it feels the water will bite.  (The text appears to be describing a method of inducing vomiting to remove the leech from the throat.)
Certainly! Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Do this, so that it falls.
And another way to perform this operation with the fumigation is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and cover the bowl with a lid that has a hole in its center; place the extremity of the instrument in that hole. Then, perform the fumigation on top; have the patient place his mouth over the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not exhaled until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-sucking part, because the blood-sucking part will fall immediately.
And if it does not fall, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salty food and vegetables, and do not drink water. It is necessary that with this treatment it will be expelled.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the gular is performed when it is visible; and it resembles tweezers as you see them, except that in it there is a certain curvature. which is placed in the gular, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is wide, in which there is an indentation made by a file, so that when you press any cause, that does not let it go.
It seems like you want me to guess what "Capitol .xl." means in English based on the given context. In medieval texts, "capitulum" or "capitol" often refers to a chapter. The number ".xl." is Roman numerals for 40. So, "Capitol .xl." likely means "Chapter 40".
In which is the summary of the discourse on abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are various species, of various kinds, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and incision by two methods, one of which is according to the species of abscesses themselves, and for what we conclude about the humors.
And the second method is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the anus; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each has its judgment by operation.
And there are some abscesses that ought not to be opened except near the maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
Other abscesses ought to be opened when they are raw and not matured according to their nature, such as those near the joints, for an abscess which is near a joint has its being prolonged until that which is in its circumference can be emptied, and easily the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay the opening of it until pus matures in the principal member; or it is near the anus, therefore open it not matured, but not raw, of incomplete digestion, except that which is near the anus, so that its content does not spread and extend to the internal parts of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or so that it is done at the end of it that it may not be healed. "But I want you to know when to perform the incision of the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
"And know that it is matured when there is a ceasing of pain and fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
"And it is important that you know to perform the incision below the abscess and from where the pus comes out.
"And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all places except those where there is a reflection; because in those that are reflected, use incision according to that member.
"But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the incision until its digestion is confirmed according to the time we have mentioned; because if you perform the incision before that, the body of the pus and much filth will be prolonged, and greatly enlarge the lips of it and its depth.
"However, some abscesses are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body, depending on necessity, or according to what the member requires.
"And it is necessary to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or many incisions, depending on the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
"And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to concave the scoop and cut into them, when they are made like bread and are ready to burst, as is done with cases of double pox and buboes.
"And of these are those that are incised with a three-angled section; and of these is the one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the abscesses of the groin.
"And there are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision are administered, and similar ones to these.
"However, when there is none like the superficial lion abscesses, you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
"And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should perforate it but do not extract all the matter at once; having extracted a portion from it, close the abscess again on the same day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this gradually until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in poor health, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the expulsion of blood, and the patient dies quickly, and you open them up.
Now be careful in this chapter and make your puncture where you will perform these operations; it is advisable to clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section, then administer some drops of lithium or ancient coto; and if the abscess is large and the punctures are many, then it is necessary that you place a cloth in each hole until they come out together.
And if in the abscess a piece of the intestine has been cut off or it is concave in that area, then it is necessary that you fill it with old coto or thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have drawn pans or rags, without moisture; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to process it and heal it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place it on the area of the blood flow many times.
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary for you to administer a remedy and care, and use powders that have been recommended in many places of this book of ours and by division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary for you to infuse powder in wine and hot oil, and place them on the area.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary for you to place powders soaked in water or oil or in wine and oil, and do this until the third day, as we have said. Then it is necessary for you to open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general. But according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated specifically by chapters.
Chapter 41
Of the cutting of abscesses that occur in the back of the head.
In the back of the head, there are small abscesses, and they are of a certain type of knot that contains tunic-like layers on their surface; and their kind is many.
And they are filled with them, and among these are those that contain moisture similar to lime. And among them are those that contain moisture similar to dust and resemble them; and among these are those that are stony and hard.
And in the section of all, and in the removal of these there is no fear, for their removal does not cause adverse effects.
And the operation in the section of these is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape is shown here, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Because if the contents are moisture, then cut this with a section according to its length in a superficial section as shown here:
And the section begins from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, you should scrape that part where it contains the moisture, and do not leave any of it at all, because if too much remains, it will return if any of it is left behind.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and leave it until another day, for with the fluid it will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
And then proceed to apply Egyptian ointment on that area, gently and thoroughly as needed, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause for concern regarding that skin layer; at that point, treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if an abscess has fatty lumps, then you should incise it in this manner: by making a cut in the shape of a cross, and inserting scissors between the two lips of the incision and moving it from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your incision meets with difficulty, then do as I have first told you.
Similarly, perform the incision and treatment of a calcified abscess as we have told you; an incision on a calcified abscess is easier because it has little blood and little moisture.
Sometimes there are ulcers from these abscesses which are on the head in some men with whom there is no moisture; this is because I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be crushed. And if someone were to strike that, it would hurt them.  (Note: "le" is used for both masculine and feminine subjects in this text, so I have interpreted "cap" as "head" rather than "chief/boss", and "femna" as "woman". The phrase "am los quals de tot no es humiditat" could also be translated as "in whom there is not any moisture at all".)
In the other types of abscesses that occur in the head and are not covered by this chapter, such as the abscesses that appear on the heads of children due to ear issues, all of these should be treated with surface incision.
And make the perforation of those [abscesses] in their lowest part, so that the body may be relieved of the poison in the lowest parts.
And then care for them with water that is appropriate for healing [the wounds].
Chapter XLII
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
These abscesses often appear in the neck, armpits, and groin areas; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
And those that occur in the neck, and many of which are generated between them, all scrofula of these is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned.
There are many types of these scrofulas, for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Certainly! Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut you and disturb the patient, or cut something that is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then place on the wound vitriol trisected or other powders that staunch the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and let what is inside heal the acuteness of the abscess, soften the wound, and begin to putrefy. When the blood has been cut.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of other little scrofulous nodes, and if so, cut them and clean them out.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root. Before, it is necessary to lay that [scrofula] with a strong double fold and let it fall by itself without harming it.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if you cut out that entire scrofula, then it is necessary for you to suture the two lips of the wound and sew immediately with sutures so that no superfluous matter remains.
But if you see that there is still superfluous matter due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary for you to understand to cut away the root of that, and then extract it and apply a suture as has been said.
And regarding those scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial puncture where you see the place of maturation, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below the body, as we have said.
And then apply an ointment and something similar to this, so that it corrodes whatever remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound has been cleaned, you should cure it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of the pustule caused by an abscess in the neck.
The ancients said that this incision should be made on the pustule, but we have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
"And this is the record of their speech.
"But in men having sciatica, it is necessary to avoid the removal of the needle, because with this [method] no benefit can be obtained, since all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
"But in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is necessary to use the section of needles to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
"Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the needles with three or four small cuts between the circles of the needles, so that the cut is in the cartilage, not in the bone, and this place is suitable for cutting because it is lacking flesh and its blood vessels are close to each other."  (Note: The text seems to be referring to acupuncture or a similar practice)
"And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the tongue with tweezers, and then slit the tongue until it reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if any are found there.
"And then cut the ligaments as we have described; and it is indicated on the section of the windpipe for hoarseness, which is caused by this that is disrupted in him and by the absorption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the hour has passed in which puncture is feared, add two lips of the wound together, and sew it up with just that alone without stitching through the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And Abulcasis says that the summary of the speech which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these apostemas have already taken over the throat of the patient, and the patient has gone into death, and his breath has dried up, and some go to cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the place of the wound for a little while, and be saved from death.
And for that reason he commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was consumed; and its malice lasted three days; and then he commanded to sew up the wound, and care for it until it was healed.
And what I myself have seen is that a maid took a knife and stuck it in her own throat, and with that cut off a piece of the pulmonary vein. And I was called to his care, and found the woman as she died, and discovered the wound and found the blood coming from the wound was small.
"Therefore, I was informed that no vein or tendon had been cut, and the air was exiting from the wound, so I healed it until it was healed.
"And do not speak to the servant if you do not raise your voice, and after a few days she will return to her senses.
"Now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
"On the incision of an abscess which occurs in the neck externally, and is called a hernia of the neck.
"This abscess named hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it is very common in women.
"And there are two types: one is natural, the other accidental.
"And the natural type is not difficult to cure.
"And the accidental type is of two kinds: one resembles large knots, and the other resembles an abscess made by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is danger. "And it should not be presumed to cut until it becomes small. "And you should examine it and investigate it as described above. If you find that it resembles large knots and is not attached to any veins, then cut it just like the knots, and extract it with water from the skin and bursa; but if not, then thoroughly explore its entire being, and afterwards heal the area with the prescribed water until it is healed.
Chapter Forty-Five.
About the Section of Various Knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And it is appropriate that I now explain the difference between a knot and a tangle, as there may be confusion.
So I say that in a tangle there is heat and fever and intense pain until the ebullition of the excess fluid subsides; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I will tell you the story of Leon who had one properly.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a swelling, and it is made thus as if by an abscess, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, first probe it and examine it at its beginning with the instrument that is called an introducer, as will be described in the following chapter.
And this is the way to investigate apostemes and all nodes; you must take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part of the node that you find in the apostema, and you should turn it slowly with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
And then measure your hand according to the size of the node, and then extract the instrument and observe what has been left behind in its place.
And if the current moisture has been forgotten, of any color it may be, then you should make a shallow incision, as I have said for other nodes.
And if there is no moisture from the trace of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
Dry it over it with a dry cloth in the shape of a cross like this: As you have been taught, and suspend that with a hook, and peel off the skin from all sides easily, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over it and extract that pus with the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in many cases this happens, and then you should extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
Because if any cause remains with him, little or too much, the knot should return according to the greatest.
And if you see that any small part remains with him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, tighten the wound, place a cautery over it to induce an abscess, and treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew up both lips and treat him with a flesh-eating ointment.
But if the vein is pulsating towards him, or non-pulsating, then you should cut and fill the area with powdered vitriol and leave it closed for two days or three until the wound softens and the blood boil subsides; then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Chapter 46
About the shapes of the instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
The forms of these instruments are of three types: one is large, the other is medium, and the third is small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of making small incisions is this:
They should be made of iron, steel, or clean razors, so that the incision is made quickly in the designated areas.
And these are the forms of experience, and they are named lancet and one of them is called bistoury.
And there are three types: large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experience is as follows:
The form of the medium experience is this:
The form of the small experience is this:
So that they may be used for those openings and exits, and fissures and abscesses, because these are due to the bones or other causes.
And they are made round, thick, smooth, like large needles with which the shoes are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or reed, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citrus wood.
And the experiences are made of black feathers, which have been arranged so that with them the fissures may be opened in the cavity where the reflections are, so that they may be reflected with their lightness to those reflections.
Based on the context and the pattern of the provided translation, here's a possible line-by-line translation:
This seems to be a medical instructional text discussing treatments for various ailments. The sentence you provided can be translated as follows:
**Translation:**
The translation for "Forma del experient petit de plom" is likely to be:
The forms of the onyx are made from different species because some of them are simple and have only one curve, while others are made of three species: large, small, and medium.
And they are onyx stones, and they come in three species.
And of those onyx stones, there are some that have two curves, and they come in three types.
And some have three curves, and there are three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple onyx stone, its form is:
Form of a large onyx stone with two curves: Form of a medium-sized onyx stone with two curves:  (Note: The text has "curvatas" which seems to be a typo, it should be "curvaturas" to match the pattern from previous lines) Form of a small onyx stone with two curves:
Form of a large onyx stone with three curves:
Based on the context and similarity to medieval medical terminology, here's a possible translation for the given line:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
Form of large scalpel:
Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The tips of these [scalpels] with which incisions are made are sharp, and the other tips are not sharp. They are not positioned in such a way that it may cause fear of cutting a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes, so that the patient is healed and finds some relief due to the heat caused by the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of cupping glasses, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of glass and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
And there is a hidden point at the edge, and on that it goes inwards and outwards when you want, as you see fit.
Sure, let's translate this line by line: And these are the forms of those:
And these are the forms of those: The forms of ulcers with which blood flow is stopped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; their forms:
Are made of brass, round with some length, and are subtle.
And you should have these types of cupping glasses - large, medium and small - so that through them you can quickly stop the flow of blood when necessary, and then it is not primarily medicine.
However, do not use them to stop blood in any part of the body, and use them only on fleshy places, such as on the thighs and buttocks, and on the arms, breasts, belly and knees, and similar fleshy places like those.
And sometimes other small instruments similar to fleabites are made from those tools, according to this form; through which blood is stopped when performed by phlebotomy or for incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this way:
Chapter XLVII.
About the care of male nipples that are similar to those of women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men become swollen as they begin to sleep, and then the nipples are also swollen, similar to the nipples of women, and are often lactating.
And to that person who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those with a lunar section in this manner, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then completely remove all the groin tissue. Afterwards, fill the wound with medicinal red ointment, and then suture the two lips of the wound closed, and cure that until it is healed.
However, if the nipple inclines towards the softened parts as it should in women, then it must be cut into two halves above, with two sections similar to a lunar shape, each of which is contained within the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then remove all the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves what is fleshy, and then treat that which remains healed.
Chapter .48
About the piercing of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus that is black.
And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything is evacuated from the abscess by pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
And then remove the cotton and treat it with suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the type of lymph nodes and scrofula, then cut it open as we said in the section on scrofula equally.
If the wound is spread in such a way that it can cause gangrene, then administer to them cautery as we have said before.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or a vein.
When a bowstring is broken and the cord above it has healed, then swollen abscesses often occur. And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to archery, it is long drawn out in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound in it.
And that which is caused by a vein is round and apparent on the surface of the body.
Incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in those below the ribs, in the groin, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or at the head should be evaded.
But on that which is caused by the inflammation of the opening of an artery, make a long incision in the cord; and afterwards widen the incision with hooks near the artery, and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
And then I place the needle on that [area] and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the bowstring with double threads in two places — which causes me to show you an extraction of two bowstrings that are in the temples.
And then I puncture the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood drains out, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then I administer a treatment in which powder is introduced until the ligaments fall; and then I treat that with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is caused by a cut vein, then you must hold water as close to the abscess as possible with your hand, and then insert the needle under the area where you held the water, making it penetrate; and in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess tightly as I have told you in the binding of the grape with two parts and two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle through all of the abscess from the initial insertion of the first needle, and tighten those threads in four places.
Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
And then place upon the pillow, which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure, which is made with egg whites and ointments until they are healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to a twisted nerve.
Thus, as an abscess occurs in the bowels and veins, so too does it occur in the nerves when it happens due to their compression or occurs from excessive labor or similar causes.
And the main cause of it is in the places of the tendons or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are weak.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and its position is without pain, and when it is narrow with intensity, the patient feels something like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess located in the front of the body, and for this reason, it is left alone, and it is weakened on all sides and does not go towards the front or back parts.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be filled with iron, because quickly afterwards there will be a contraction.
"However, if it is in the head or forehead, use a spatula with the hook. "But if the abscess is small, then use scissors and carefully cut it open.
"And if it is large, then suspend it with threads, and carefully remove it; and then close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
"Chapter 1
"About the incision of an abscess which occurs in the same way as it does in the belly.
"There are many people who have seen in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies certain things which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms; their nature is subtle and their head is large; and already their lips have turned, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very remarkable.
"And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two things which resembled mushrooms even more closely, and there was no difference between those white ones, of very small nature.
"And already the lips of those were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore, I examined them and found one with eighteen needles in the feet and the other with six needles in the feet.
And the operation in their examination is that you should consider if the patient is moist and the color of the area is white, moist, and of subtle reason; then you should examine them with a spatula, and there should be cauteries in your presence, because many times the drying out of it will expel much blood; and if you see blood, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient weak and fearful, beware of examining with iron; rather take freshly made lead filings, and strengthen that area in the manner we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead in the area until it is cut and falls by itself without effort.
But if the area is of a large size, then in its examination there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you cut most of it, and then cauterize that area so that it does not return.
And then care for him until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut one that is dark in color, with little feeling, and slow movement, for that is also like cancer.
And I will come to remember this regarding cancer as well.
Chapter 52.
Of the treatment of swelling of the navel.
Swelling of the navel is caused by various things; either by fissures in the intestine that lies over the stomach, and from it issues the gut or bowel according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by trapped wind.
But if it is by a fissure in the intestine and issuance of the gut, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it is without pain, and appears in various places. And if it is by the issuing of the bowel, then its appearance with that which we have mentioned is of greater variety, and when you press on it as said before, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and it is very light to touch, and a great deal of water and vigorous work make it worse.
"But if due to moisture, it is swollen and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor is it hard.
"And if it is due to blood, then you will see the abscess appear with blackish discoloration.
"But if it is due to flesh-eating disease, then the abscess will be serious, large, and hard, and it will be fixed in a certain amount.
"But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it will cause swelling.
"And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an arrow or vein, or due to flatulence; then you must be prohibited from treating it, because in such cases there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arrows and veins.
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold his breath and remain extended; then show with your finger around the entire navel, and then command him to stay between your hands on his belly; then encircle with linen cloth around the navel over the area that you have shown with your finger; then extend most of the abscess above with a large hook; then bind it around with strong thread or silk and in the manner of binding appropriately.
And then cut the middle of the abscess that has extended onto the bandage and insert your finger into that hole; and if you have found and secured it with the bandage, then extract carefully and push the intestine back to its original place within the belly.
And if you have found the hernia, then take it with a hook; and cut off its excess parts.
But if it is contrary to your bowel or vein, then go around that area, and then return to your operation. Take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, and insert the needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the extended flesh can dry out and fall off on its own; or cut it away when it has thinned and dried, and then treat it with water from appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is not fleshy or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture found in it, and then treat it with appropriate water to solidify the area.
The phrase "Capitol .liii." translates to "Chapter 53" in English. This appears to be an indication of the section or chapter number within the medieval medical treatise.
"De curacio de cranc." translates to "On the treatment of cancer" in English. This phrase indicates that the subsequent text will discuss methods and remedies for treating cancer.
"Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu." translates to "We have already said, in the division, about the type of cancer and the manner in which it is subject to treatment with medicines, and that iron is an avoider in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said about the main and cautious aspects of its treatment." This passage discusses various aspects related to the treatment of cancer using medicines and the precautions involved.
"E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit." translates to "And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as in the breast or groin and similar areas of the body, with the intention of removing all of it, especially when it is beginning small." This passage discusses the views of ancient medical practitioners on treating cancer, emphasizing that early intervention can be effective.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which they will be located for the operation, and also provide in the opening the tools that are necessary for this purpose; and then clean thoroughly from all sides with a good scrubbing until there is no remaining cause of his disease. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it too quickly, and press on the areas, and clean off all the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument suitable for this purpose from among your instruments.
But if there is too much thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood has stopped, and then care for it with the other care until it is healed.
Chapter .4
Of the care for those suffering from dropsy.
We have already mentioned, in the division, of the types of dropsy caused by water and the signs of each type, and the care for them with medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be approached with iron in the case of tympanites or hydrothorax, because that is fatal.
And when you have treated this kind of dropsy with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, then consider that if the patient is already weakened by another illness or another type of dropsy, such as a cough or abdominal pain similar to these, then beware not to treat them with iron, because there is danger in doing so.
However, if you see that the patient is full of vigor and has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then the manner of treating him is for you to lift the patient with your hands, and then immediately press his belly with your hand, drawing out the water from the lower part near the navel, and then take a thorn-shaped spatula like this:
that is two long pointed parts, with a pointed tip like a spatula; but however, it should have some slight narrowing at the end, so that in the operation you do not enter into the intestine and cause harm.
And then consider if the dropsy is caused by the intestines, because then it is necessary for you to make an incision along the navel for three finger widths toward the lower parts, on the right side of the navel.
"But if the swelling of the edematous (hydropic) is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
"And if the swelling is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
"And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wishes to have it, so that the excess fluids do not flow freely to that place.
"Then pierce the entire intestine with the instrument and insert it into that incision. Raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the abdominal wall, and cut away whatever excess there is; if it's about the size of a fingernail or so.
"Then pierce the abdominal wall until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water (fluid) is located. "And then extract that (fluid) and insert an instrument of this shape: "It is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver, iron, or pewter, and at the lower end there is a small opening. On the sides, there are three openings: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is curved like a feather quill, as you see:
And at the top of the patient's foot is a bandage, because when the instrument reaches the water, they should immediately place it on the instrument, so that in an instant, a large amount of water is evacuated, because if you evacuate more than necessary in an hour, the patient will die very quickly due to the dissolution of their animal spirit, or you will cause five-finger death, which is close to mortality.
"But evacuate according to the amount of virtue within the patient, and according to what the pulse's disposition indicates to you about the patient's virtue and their overall condition.
"Then extract the instrument, and hold the water that is causing [the problem], because it will be retained by the tube that draws from the vessel which you have been told to pierce in this manner.
"Then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, but be careful not to leave too much water inside.
"But if you fear for the patient and there is a large amount of water left, then treat that with a burial in hot sand, immerse it in baths, expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
"And cauterize on the stomach and the spleen near the extraction site of the water, as I have already mentioned in what has been said before.
"Chapter 51
"On the treatment of children born with imperforate urinary openings.
Some times some children are born from the womb of their mother and their head's fontanel is not open (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, one must pierce with a needle as soon as the child is born using a very thin spatula like this:
And immediately place a fine lead needle in the hole and tie it, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then immediately replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close this hole.
But that whose hole is narrow should be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place are called hypospadias, which means that in these cases, the one who is born has the end of the penis at the bottom of the glans, so he cannot urinate straight ahead until he raises his penis upwards with his hand; and it is not good for him to have intercourse, because the semen cannot reach the woman directly, and this is a very bad condition.
Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical treatises, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And be careful that in your operation to stop the bleeding, because this happens many times; and place yourself near the patient with something to stop the blood flow, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
About the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the tip of the penis, and about the darkening and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Many times this swelling occurs in the penis and is called an excess of flesh.
And one [type] is malignant, while the other is benign.
Benign [swelling], you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the excess until it is completely removed; then place over it a bandage soaked in Egyptian ointment; and then cure it with ointment of white lead until it is healed.
And if the swelling is malignant and dark in color, then you should apply a cautery near its base and root.
However, if the swelling is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the inside portion at first until it is consolidated; and then cure the outside part, because when you cure both parts together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not become narrow. ️
And already there is blackening and corruption in the genitals and the foreskin; then it is necessary for you to cut out everything that has turned black and that tends to become corrupt or has already become corrupted; and then line over that place with honey, which is mixed with finely ground peel of pomegranate and sieved and sifted barley.
And then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
for the cautery is beneficial for two reasons at once, that is, to stop bleeding and to treat the wound when it is corrupting.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then it is necessary for you to insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required for them; and when it occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you separate it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to discern those accurately, then you should cut with a spatula part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is delicate, is very easily perforated due to its delicacy.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread, which has already been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking together again.
And then it should be treated with six styptic powders until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of children and the care of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not like the other diseases, but because it is our operation and under our control, and since children are most affected by this condition, it is necessary that we assign to it the best method of operation and the easiest way for them to heal.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this practice through experience. That is why I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a razor and tweezers; they use a ligature with thread and incision with the nail.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text: And with the purification that is done with alphecati, and which is digital, used by cobblers, the foreskin of the male member is not secured, because it enters easily into its opening.
But in the operation with a nail, be careful not to hit bone and spoil your work. And the child's foreskin is naturally short, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experiment has revealed to me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, for this reason, the sharpness on top is just as much as the sharpness underneath; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally between the two sharp edges, and cut accordingly in one go; and it is made a compression with thread in a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, with which no error can be found.
And the first way to perform the operation is that you make the child stand up if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave him alone until the next day.
"And then proceed in that manner which is possible for you to assist and support their understanding. "And then prepare yourself by standing between their legs, and make sure not to be clumsy; hide the scissors in your hand or behind your leg, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
"And then insert your hand into their penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the penis is exited, and then clean it from any accumulated filth.
The form of the forceps for amputation is as follows:
The fingertips should be blunt and the other tips should be sharp, so that the nail does not extend beyond the tip of the forceps. The length of both handles should be equal to the width of two thumbnails.
However, the mistake in amputation is that if you cut too high, you must remove the entire tendon or a part of it.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the tendon with your thumb before the incision at the site and cut it according to its thickness.
And if you cannot grasp it with your thumb, then pull it out with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed and there is still swelling beneath the skin at the site of the incision, then leave it alone until the swelling has subsided, and carefully peel away the scab, and cut according to your preparation.
And be careful not to cut off the tip of the finger, for that will not grow back.
And therefore treat it with something to heal the wound, using the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
Based on the context provided, here's my attempt at translating and interpreting the given sentence:
And take special care of him with that which we have mentioned until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction from stones or congealed blood, or from a polyp or tumor, and it appears to be similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned and the cause is strong on the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and very thin, like a goose quill, and as long as a hand span and a half, at the end of which there should be a thin cane.
Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
And make the patient lie down on a blanket, and pierce their bladder and penis with damp cloths, olive oil, and rose water.
And then insert the tube with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis back towards the navel; then push the tube into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, so that the patient knows when he is empty, and this is not done in this order, but in the meat where it goes crooked.
And then gradually draw out the fluid with wool, because the urine will soak the wool.
Then extract that and use it as a treatment for urine retention, using a tube, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 59.
On the quality of enema for the bladder with clyster syringes and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or a constriction of pus, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clyster syringe, and this is its form:
"If the extremity of the patient is numb, it is closed. And there are three openings: two on one side, as you see.
At the beginning is a concave opening, within which lies what has been peeled away. According to the quantity with which it overflows, without addition, until some cause pulls it out from its humidity, it is pulled out; and when it is expelled, with this it is pulled out; and when it is expelled long, according to how much it makes a sound like clampcedra with which naphtha is used in sea battles.
Therefore, when you want to prohibit the moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clapcedra into the moisture, and draw with it the water that has been peeled off from above, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clapcedra.
Then insert the end of the clapcedra into the penis as we have mentioned in the chapter on circumcision; and immediately draw out the moisture with it, because that moisture reaches the bladder soon, and the patient feels this.
The form of a subtle crystalline substance with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And whether it is made of silver or lead, its tip should be similar to a small feather, and then you insert it gently.
Then take a pig's bladder and place in it the moisture you want to crystallize, then tie it tightly with a double thread between two strong ligatures, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of the crystal into the wound.
Then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the moisture, and hold it in place until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it all around its circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that they are reversed; and then fill the circle as if it were a bag, because you place in it the water or oils and other liquids that you want.
Then tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
On the extraction of stones.
We have already explained in the division the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
And we have mentioned the stone on which surgical operation with the hand and section is performed.
And the stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is placed in the bladder.
And I will now relate this with a clear explanation and summary.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and one of its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder is very watery in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient frequently urinates, and many times with pain, and is also constipated; and there are frequent pains in their buttocks. ghai
And the healing of children from this is easier before they reach fourteen years of age, and it is a difficult treatment for the elderly. However, among the young, it can be healed by this method.
And of that for which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of this process to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the wind from his intestines; because sometimes this wind prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
And then the patient should be taken by his feet and shaken and moved in this way to make the stone descend into the bottom of the bladder or sometimes move from its place.
And then make that cut between your prepared hands, and let the patient's hands be under his buttocks, so that the entire bladder is tilted towards the lower parts.
And then remove it completely from there.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly cut into him.
And if you do not get all of it with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the little finger if he is a young man, and insert it into his anus. "And seek within the stone until it is beneath your tongue. And turn (or transform) that little by little into the bladder's neck.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it out through the cut area near where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's knees upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand to raise the penis that is beneath the knees, in the area where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula, which should look like this: And make an incision between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle, but towards the left buttock; and let the incision be on that stone, and your finger should be in the rectum, and let the incision be transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much of the stone can be grasped with the finger, no more, because when you press your finger, which is in the rectum, on the stone, you will extract it without difficulty.
And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, for which the extraction from it is made difficult by this.
And of that [stone], there is one similar to a seed, and it is round, and an easy extraction is made from it.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, insert it into the crack.
And if it is not so inserted, then you must invent over it, or strengthen over it with a suitable tool, the end of which should be like a file with which you can press against the stone, and nothing will come out from it; or insert beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot [do it] on that [stone], then you should widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, immediately cut it off with powdered vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at first you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it open; and then press a little on that; and do the same thing if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, it is unskilled to cut it with a large incision, because two things may happen to the patient: either they die or continuous dripping of urine occurs, because the place is not completely healed.
"But administer an expulsion of it from within that is evacuated, or introduce in the fracture with forceps until it extracts in pieces.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place upon that cloth infused with oil and wine, or with warm oil and hot water, to ensure the abscess is effectively drawn out.
And then lay the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with an ointment of diaphoretic herbs and an ointment of diabezoil until it is healed.
However, if an abscess forms in the wound, adhesive and corrosive, and it appears as if blood is frozen in the bladder, and urine is blocked (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it provokes the bladder to rot and causes putrefaction in the patient.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply all appropriate remedies to promote healing until it is healed.
Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it has been placed there, and the release of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water that I recommend before reaching dryness, because excessive use of this treatment is accused of dryness. And I have tested this, which is that you take a perforator of iron fillet, the form of which is as follows:
With a sharpened triangular tip, sharp, placed in a handle.
And then take thread, and tie the bladder with that below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, easily piercing until the perforator reaches that stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand in that stone little by little, and you will pierce the hole until you make it penetrate from the other side, for the urine is released immediately.
And then press your hand over the area that is rough on the stone's outer side of the bladder, because that is pierced and washed away with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this cure is not suitable for you due to any reason that prevents it, then place one rope below the stone, and another rope above the stone. Then immediately sit on the stone in that way between two ropes. And then remove it. Then untie the bandage and clean the congealed blood that is on the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the rope below the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other rope above, because when the rope is untied near the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary for you when you tie the rope above, that you lift the cord to the sides above, or return your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of stone from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone is seen in one of them, then the cure for it is difficult and it is prohibited by many ways.
One of them is because the woman is very weak.
And the second reason is that you will not find a woman who is well-informed enough to uncover herself to a physician when she is chaste or one of the women who have husbands.
And the third reason is that you will not find a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth reason is that in women the site of the incision near the bladder is far from the bladder itself, so you need a long incision, and there is fear [of complications] with that.
However, if necessity compels you to do so, then you should take a female physician who is very skilled, and she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of her, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated midwife in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, present her [the woman] and command her to do everything you order her to do, from the inquiry about the bladder at the beginning; this is so that she can see if the woman is a virgin, for which reason she should insert her finger into her vagina and search for the cervix.
Therefore, if she finds it [the cervix], let her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision on it [the cervix].
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
It seems like you've provided the first source sentence, but I don't see the actual sentence here. Please provide the medieval text that you would like me to translate into English.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And at the beginning, let the incision be small; then introduce the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size which you know the stone will exit from there.
And know that the types of stones are many: for there are few and large, and smooth and rough, and long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you know how many types there are of it, by what you indicate about what you want.
And if you see blood flow, place crushed vitriol on the area and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And ensure that you have prepared with yourself the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with fingers and a stricture until the bleeding stops; do not move it; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will soon die. And then treat the wound.
Therefore, once the sharpness of the blood has passed after several days and the area softens, then you return to your procedure until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62
On incision for hernia in the groin.
A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a cyst.
And sometimes it is in the proper scrotum which nature has prepared for the testicle until another testicle appears; and it is the cord of the spermatic duct between the white membrane mentioned above, and this is not a cyst but a hernia.
And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the testicles, because at those times this substance flows out, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is either declining to a yellow or reddish color, or red, or black and turbid, or watery white, and the latter is what is most common.
And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water occurs are these: because if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling appears round and a little long, like the shape of an egg, and the genitalia appear, because the humidity extends to all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper skin layer, then the swelling appears round like half an egg, and for this reason it is believed to be another egg.
And if the humidity is between the root of the genitals and the white part, then it is necessary to leave it alone.
And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the swelling with a glass of the same shape; and according to what appears in the trace of the glass, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if possible for you, and empty his body.
Then he should be laid on his back on some elevated cause, and leave words of comfort with him.
And you should sit on the left side of him/her, and command the assistant to stand on his/her right side, who should extend their rod towards one of the two flanks at the level of the kidneys and the lower part of the belly.
And then take a wide spatula and carefully cut along the middle of the back from the neck to the waist.
And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should divide the spine of the back, until it reaches the white tendon encompassing it.
And scrape that away, and observe, and be careful not to cut it; and your scraping should be thin and delicate, so that it is held up by the most subtle and thorough scraping possible.
And then puncture the white tendon with a wide hole, and extract all the water from it.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with a hook, and extend the white tendon towards both ends; and do not touch the spine encompassing the back, and cut the tendon in such a way as is possible for you. And cut it completely or in pieces, and especially its delicate side, because if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Based on the given translation pattern and the structure of the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation of the new sentence:
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
But if the water is divided into two equal parts, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part as you have done in the other; and if it appears to be one operation, then perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and in between the incisions place wool soaked in oil or olive oil; and place another wool soaked in wine and oil outside, and spread it over two cushions and the edge of the belly; and place on top double-layered cloths and pillows, and bind them together with a bandage according to this manner:
And then take two cloths and soak them in carded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends with which you press from either side or damp wool, and attach them securely in the crotch of the pants, and one end should go from the buttocks into the back, and the second should go to the groin area, and two ends under two cushions and two other ends over two knees, and all the binding should be secured in the crotch of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting with iron; and it is that you take a subtle scalpel-like cautery and incise with it the cords of the genitals, and it burns according to what we have recommended until the white bladder containing water is revealed, and then you take a cautery in this form: and it resembles a Greek letter.
And then you puncture the bladder with that cautery, and it is burnt until all the moisture is expelled.
And then you stretch the bladder with hooks, and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with a thin, heated cautery; and incise it as much as possible until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
And know that this operation is safer and less prone to blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if an abscess forms during the cutting or cauterization, or if there is bleeding, then you should treat whatever opposition occurs to you accordingly, with the care that is appropriate for it as it is said.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Here's the translation for the given sentence:
And then I opened it widely so that all the water could flow out.
And then place your hand over the opening and tie it securely to ensure that all remaining water can flow out. And then take care of it so that the wound may heal.
But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is only done because the white fat in the orifice of the wound resists and prohibits the exit of the water. Therefore, it is necessary for you to insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water can be extracted from drops, as described above; or adjust a small tube in the opening of the wound.
And know that the water will return and may be collected again within four to six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will thus pass through their days.
Chapter 63
Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia there is fear of losing it to death in greater dispositions, so I have seen its dismissal and being saved by the best method.
And I am remembering the operation in that area and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose humors are imbalanced and this occurs for several reasons: either due to an acute bitter superfluity that is infused into the humors, or due to a blow.
And the color of the abscess matches the color of the body, and it is not found to be painful, and it is a serious abscess.
And if the abscess is light, it is called "lapificated," whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by a knot in the veins or by an inflammation of these veins so that the memory of it is already perceived, or by an inflammation of the veins.
But that which is caused by an inflammation of the veins is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by an inflammation of the vein does not disperse at all when compressed with your fingers.
And it is possible to perform a section on this type as well as on other tissues; and that is for you to incise the sheath of the humors, and then extend the egg over the divided parts, and extract the white from the yolk, and cut the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them off, and incise the ligament after you have separated it from all the divided parts of the yolk.
If the eye is already sealed with those skin flaps, then you should remove the eye and sew it up.
And if there is adhesion between any part of the intestines or between what is between the intestines, then you should free all that adhesion and sew it up with round stitches.
But if there is native flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should sew up all that is from it, and remove the eye as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernias due to wind.
Wind is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by some membrane resembling a cyst, with softening of the testicles, and makes walking and exercise difficult for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of what precedes memory (i.e., prevention).
Nevertheless, we must speak of the operation that was performed by the first ones.
And I say that it is necessary to lay the patient on an elevated table; then lift up the support of the testicles from below; and next take the penis with your fingers through the foreskin; and let another assistant hold this, and stretch it strongly.
And next, make an incision with a sharp scalpel transversely on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
And next, peel away from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arrows that are in the temples.
And next, insert into them a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where life is found, and tie it again at the last of their [vessels]. And next, make a straight incision through the middle of them according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then treat the wound with a remedy for other wounds in which you wish to promote healing, so that the vessels may close and thus prevent necrosis of one of the two testicles, because this is not harmful.
Sure, let's break down the text and translate it line by line:
Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical treatises, I would translate "Capitol .lxv." as:
Based on the context provided in your previous examples, I'll attempt a translation of "De la cura de hernia entestinal." into English line by line:
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends on the belly from the sides of the miracle of the belly, because some of the intestines coming out of that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or an excrescence of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by leap, by loud noise, by sudden elevation due to some serious cause, or by similar events.
The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and is an abscess inside the belly because the ciphac presses on the intestine.
The sign of it is when it is due to a rupture of the ciphac, because at first it causes sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess near the coccyx bone, and this is because the intestine has come out, and its body is protruding outside the ciphac.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an enteric-scrotal hernia.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
In the treatment of this disease with iron, caution is necessary because it must be avoided in that case.
The manner of performing this operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand into the depths of its cavity if they obey their return, and then place yourself face to face between their legs, holding their hands, and raise their thighs.
Then place the string that is the string of the testicles on top, and cut through the entire length of the testicle string; then insert into the two lips of the incision scissors according to what you need to open the incision with them.
And if the opening, according to the quantity that is possible for you, has been enlarged enough.
Then carefully remove the fat that is left after the testicle string, until the white hard tissue is revealed from each side.
Then insert your finger into the testicle, which is between the white fat that remains after the string of the egg, and separate it from the fat behind the egg, removing the adhesion in that area.
Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence:
And search with these words that there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in a white, hard cover. But if you find any cause related to him, then you peel that from his abdomen below.
And then make an incision in the area below the tail of the testicles, so that blood and pus may flow out as we have recommended in this treatise.
And then administer lanolin soaked in oil and apply it to the wound; administer the ointment that we have recommended (and sometimes white cipher is cauterized, which we said near the incision to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens). Leave the ointment until it falls off by itself.
But if the scab takes too long to fall off, then soak it in hot water and place it over the area until it falls off, as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the other wound care method until it is healed.
Chapter 66
Of a windy hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for a hernia with veins; which is that you tie off the vessels near the incision gently; and then make an incision in the middle of the area around the abscess with water that opens it, until the vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67
Of the dysfunction that occurs in the joints.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said, and it protrudes from the place.
And do not give any cause to the intestines to the genitals; and if they give, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time with this is prolonged, there is a fixed fissure in the bladder until it descends into the bladder; and this happens due to the extension of the bladder which is in the joints as we have said, whose cause is that the bladder is extended, and then it becomes softened and the place becomes swollen and protrudes.
And its cure is with cautery as has been previously described in this account.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the place of the protruding rupture of the swellings with dry heat according to the extent corresponding to three fingers.
This phrase translates to: "And then strengthen the white bandage that is under the collar until it is revealed.
And then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the bandage, and press it against the abdomen.
And then sew the two prominent parts at the end of the bandage together with stitches.
And then remove the end of the reed, and do not cut off all of the bandage, nor extend it outward, nor any other similar cause, as I will tell you in the treatment for intestinal hernia.
And then treat it with the treatment for wounds, and when you have cut the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the bandage is tight and not adjusted to the prominence of the rupture.
A cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
About softening the testicle's neck.
Often the neck of the testicles in some men is softened by this because the flesh that is between them is softened and it is believed to be beneficial for him.
When it is necessary for the person who is responsible for the patient's care to lay them down according to their body shape, then remove all the bedding that has been softened on top of the natural bedding; and then carefully sew together two lips with a stitch.
And if you wish, at the beginning, cauterize the excess of the softened bedding with three or four firm stitches.
And then cut between the stitches; and then cure with other remedies until it is healed and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
Of Castration.
Know that in our law, castration is forbidden, but for certain reasons it has come to my attention to write about it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways. One way is so that this may be known by the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows how to cure the one on whom it occurs. The other way is that we have often had necessity for the castration of other animals for our use of them, such as mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similarly with other animals.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by torsion or by incision and excision.
But in that which is done by torsion, the way to perform the operation is that we make the beast lie down in hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened and hang. And then take them with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear below the contact.
But in castration done by incision and excision, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each testicle with a single cut until two testicles are processed.
And then make another incision on each one that you have removed. And do not leave any trace on them, except for the slight scar that is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better when done by torsion, because torsion leaves less trace of the testicles, so that the beast desires coitus.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
It looks like you are starting with the translation of a new chapter or section from the medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .lxx." likely means "Chapter 70" in Latin numerals. This indicates that we are beginning with Chapter 70 of the text. If you provide more sentences, I can assist you further by translating them into English as well.
"De la cura de hermafrodozia" means "On the treatment of hermaphroditism." This is the title or topic of Chapter 70 in the medieval medical treatise.
"Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears that the space between the testicles contains what looks like a female vulva with pubic hair.
"And sometimes from this, urine runs which is in the space between the testicles.
"In women, it is of one kind: and that is when the woman's vulva on the pubis appears like two male testicles, a little less prominent at the outer edge, like a man's foreskin and two testicles.
"And the treatment is of three kinds: for two types in men, and one type in women. "And it is important that you first remove those attached tissues until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the same treatment used for other diseases.
"And in the second type of men, where there is urine running through the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for him.
Chapter 21.
Of constipation and prominent flesh due to causes related to women.
Constipation is generally attributed to natural causes until it becomes excessive, and it is treated with caution; sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like it does in men and persists even during intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold the excess constipation with your hand or with an ointment and herbs.
And do not apply too much ointment, especially on the rectum, to avoid causing bleeding.
And then care for it with remedies for diseases until it is healed.
However, flesh that is born is flesh that grows on the mother's horror until it fills her up, and it is often found outside of its usual place according to its appearance (and for this reason some people call it "tail-shaped illness"); therefore, we should treat it in the same way as constipation, and cure it until it is healed. ️
Chapter 72.
About the treatment of skin diseases.
Skin disease occurs when the woman's vulva is not opened or is only slightly opened. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental (pain) is due to an underlying illness, and that illness is caused either by flesh that is not well-aligned or by a subtle or thick humour.
And it occurs either in the womb of the mother, or in her ribs, or in her upper abdomen, or in her lower abdomen. Prohibit cutting, engaging in intercourse, and pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is obtained by examination of the midwife, if the inflammation is apparent, immediately; but if it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the inflammation is due to a subtle humour and is close to the two lips (labia), then cut and drain it.
And place your fingers on both sets of lips (labia minora and majora), then place your thumbs together on both sides at the same time.
And the woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread apart, then forcefully separate both sets of lips until that subtle humour is broken and the inflammation is opened.
Then take wool, soak it in oil and place it on the area, and come back the next day to ensure that the wound does not close up.
"But if the clot is large and thick, then it is necessary that you insert a spatula or a myrtle leaf into it.
"But if the obstruction is by flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open.
"And use the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
"And then administer a wide lead probe so that the wound is not lightly cauterized.
"And keep it for several days, and administer some dry leaves to it.
"Then it should be treated with the other consolidation remedy until it is healed.
"And sometimes it happens during the birth of other animals, and then you should proceed in this manner. "But if this is due to cancerous abscesses, do not perform any procedure against the cancerous abscess that is in the womb.
Chapter 73.
"On the care of hemorrhoids, and tail, and red bump that occur in the vagina of women.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And I have already said in the division the types of those and their signs, and I will also say those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and teeth, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to be felt, then in those cases, care should not be done with iron.
But those which are in the mother's opening and on which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in cold air and then extinguish it with fire tongs or with rough cloth and incise those with the nails.
And then sprinkle on those the flow of blood from one of the cutting powders without biting, such as ashes and similar to that.
And then wrap her feet in cold water for an hour, and then put that [her foot] in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and leaves and similar things.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, make an ointment with water on the back of him/her.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
And then take wool and soak it in either coliander juice, or rosemary juice, or rue juice with five parts wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat that until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
When a perforation of the eardrum occurs in a pregnant woman.
Many species of abscesses can occur in a pregnant woman, such as carbuncles and abscesses of the teeth and ulcers and hives and erysipelas and anal fistulas and hemorrhoids and others. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the species of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And it is necessary for me to speak in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in a pregnant woman when it is one of the abscesses that I have mentioned, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.  (Note: "opperacio" likely refers to a surgical procedure such as lancing or draining an abscess.)
Adonc: Then or Therefore
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
And then the midwife should follow from the right side and with her left hand hold the instrument that has been used to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be revealed in the following instructions.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument you should insert it with the right hand into the orifice of the mother of the woman, and that which enters from the instrument into the mother should not exceed the size of the orifice of the mother and be gentle with the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the orifice of the mother, then you should place cloths on the surface of the orifice of the mother to prevent any instrument from entering the orifice of the mother.
And it is necessary that you place the end of the string that runs along the instrument on the left side and above, and that the administrator holds the instrument and turns the string until the orifice of the mother is opened.
And when the excretion appears and it is touched by hand and is hot and wet, then you should dry that part with a linen cloth.
And when the pus has been evacuated, then you should place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some styptic property; and apply the pressure to the edge of the orifice of the mother.
And place outside the mother and over the mattress a clean wool blanket soaked in water, on which mallow flowers are placed.
Then let it be treated for about two days with an ointment that should be applied until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed so that it is sterilized with water and honey, then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia is boiled, and then returned to the ointment treatment.
And if the wound is deeply embedded in the flesh, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from treating him with iron, but take care of him with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives how to treat childbirth fever when it appears in an unnatural way, as shown in the figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and that when you see the woman pressing down on her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is relieved because of what is happening to her during labor, and hastens the exit of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the baby's exit with its head first, and the second with that or hanging or dangling from the umbilical cord.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the stomach of the woman so that the fetus descends gently, because when it descends onto its head, give her the second birth, and cleanse her of those excesses with a good cleansing.
But if it is the other way around, it is unnatural and not commendable, for when the fetus exits feet first and the body follows the head and the legs, or one hand comes out with a foot, or the head comes out with a hand, or the belly turns over on its neck, and there are similar uncommendable presentations.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against error and disappointment.
And I am showing all the figures of those [presentations] and what skill is in them so that it may be indicated by this and be placed above this.
When the child comes out headfirst by natural means, and it is strong on the woman and it becomes difficult for her, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then make this drink: [or let the women have it] and steam the vulva of the woman with hot fenugreek and moist oils.
The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure involving the use of an instrument called a "metrona" and a substance referred to as "segondina." Here's a line-by-line translation: And press the woman's belly until she gives birth.
But if she does not [give birth], then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with a mixture of pepper and fenugreek, using a mortar and pestle.
And then command her to be pressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the birth will follow shortly after.
And if both hands of the child have come out at the beginning, then it is necessary for you to gently push them back little by little. But if [the child] does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a board and lift her feet up, and then knock the board against the ground; and have the woman held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the hands are not turned back and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will follow shortly after.
When the child comes out from its feet, then it is necessary for you to push those [feet] upwards, and then turn the child slightly, and then you should knead it, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
When he has exited the space between the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make him sneeze with conditions, for it will be better if God wishes it so.
And if it is not better with what we have recommended, then you return the small object little by little until you place that second figure naturally, for that will be better with a gentle exit.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of the mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good beating, and then line it with water on the woman's vulva, under her lower belly. And then make her sit in warm water until she reaches the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts left of him are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and place it under him. And when you have fumigated him for an hour, then make him sit on a chair, and then make him sneeze and open his mouth, and lift that object, and press the lower part of his belly with gentle compression, for the object will soon come out.
Similarly, allow the afterbirth to hang from one of your hands. It should be attempted to reduce the hand with it, but if you cannot do this, then lift the woman and make her walk around.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and shake her body vigorously, and then administer emetics which I have recommended from herbs.
When the delivery is upon us, then make that incision on the pubic bone, and study over the reduction of the hand, and place the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself until it is delivered.
When the infant is born, spread its hands and place it on the back of its mother. Let the midwife have the hand of the child and gently turn him so that he turns easily.
And when it is done and as soon as he has been turned, then place on his navel that which we have recommended of oil and soft cloths.
And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done this, then make that cut on the pubic bone and command her to lean on the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make her sneeze with conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus is on the side.
When the mother's horror has passed in this manner, consider, and then cut the secondine with your nail until it is emptied of its moisture.
If the limb is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you should cut it at the navel, to prevent it from being held and dying.
Then you should push the limb back into its parts inside until you place it according to what is needed, and send the woman to fetch some hot water, and the servant should pull it out gently with ease, if God wills it.
Birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born with the same number of eyes, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and late in coming; there are five natural causes for this, not six.
And count them, whether they are multiplied or not, as a second one, and separate them by the navel cord of each one of those, and sometimes they come out like this through natural easy birth, and sometimes they come out through unnatural birth that is inexplicable as we have said.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and you arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and performs this task with ease and finesse, with care, and is clever according to every figure as it has been prepared by ingenuity for health.
Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes, in the mother, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even ten (fetuses) are formed. It has already been verified that a woman gave birth to six, and another to ten all formed, which was caused by the measurement of the glorious wise.  This passage seems to describe multiple pregnancies and fetal development, with the final phrase possibly referring to divine or natural forces governing such occurrences.
And all this should be within the knowledge of the midwife because she quickly recognizes similar signs in that case and therefore prepares herself for it accordingly.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it is not yet expelled, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and does not suffer from any of the accidents for which her life is feared to be endangered.
"At that time, it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side on her back, and her head should be inclined downwards while her hips are raised.
"And the minister should hold or tie her down on her left side to prevent her body from spreading during the delivery of the child.
"Then you should moisturize the mother's mouth with oil, honey, and a mixture of anise, fennel, and linseed.
"Then the midwife should anoint her hands with those oils and mixtures, then she should gently insert her hand into the mother, and then she should seek with her hand the place where the nails of the child are.
"At this point, consider if the child is ready to come out head first: then place your nails in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under the chin, or on the breastbone, or near the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
"But if the descent is by the feet, then in the heel, or in the middle of the thighs.
"And it is necessary to hold the nails with the right hand and place the curvature of them in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand until the nails reach one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the soft part.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And let it be removed entirely, so that its removal is eased in the same way as it is done with teeth when their extraction is necessary.
And it is necessary that what is between them has its extension softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil, insert them expertly, and move that which is retained.
Therefore, if the baby's head is stuck, then the nails should be pushed back towards where it is wider; and do this until the entire baby has been delivered.
But if the hand is delivered before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then pull it out until all of it has been delivered, and then cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the baby's head is large, or if it is constricted during delivery, or if there is water in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a spine spatula and split the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to do this. The shape of which will be explained with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly act if the condition is a large head by nature. Then it is necessary to incise that with an instrument called algematu or extract it with alunda, as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head is protruded and constricted, you should use forceps, then split open until the fluid in the feet has drained out.
But if it is not complicated and does not respond to extraction, then you should incise the head as soon as possible, according to your skill.
And if the sides of the abdomen are swollen or edematous, then you should pierce it until the fluid that is in it runs out.
But if the condition is in its feet, then the attraction is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is easy.
But if it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and feet until the fluid runs out of them.
But if the other limbs are outside and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into the pelvic cavity, and with that she should look for the head, and pull it towards the mentioned until it reaches the mother's mouth. Then she should introduce one or two fingers into it, and pull it out with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurs in her, then it is necessary not to apply a cup over it; instead, it is necessary to administer a poultice of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if it is on the same side, then if possible, let it be punctured: and administer the remedy that we have mentioned for a living wound.
And if this is not possible, then let it be incised into parts, and let it be extracted.
And it is necessary that you leave no trace of the abscess inside.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure of such abscesses that occur in the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then give him water containing styptic herbs and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and on that same place another growth developed, and then the other fetus also died. It happened to her that she had a long-standing abscess in her navel; and it swelled until it burst open, and she began to pass arms.
And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I placed on him some plasters of strong attraction, and an os came out of him, and after a few days, another os came out; and I was greatly amazed, since there are no bones in the stomach.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
So I examined the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman being in her seventh month of pregnancy, and she had been living this way for a long time, until a small arm came out of her.
And I did not consider this to be strange, but rather that in this there is science and help for those who practice the medical arts.
Of the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
The shape of the hook with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of a stretcher in which the lips are cut, with two hooks at both ends. However, this hook should be more subtle and finer than the previous one, and it should be made either of ebony or boxwood.
And let the width of each post be approximately two finger-widths and the margin of each about one finger-width; and the length of each is a hand and a half; and in the middle of two posts there are two adjustments of that same post which are already fixed, whose length is a little more than half a hand, and the width of each is about two finger-widths or a little more.
And let these two additions be inserted into the mouth of the bedpan so that it will be opened with them when you turn the aforementioned two handles.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two handles as you see, and the length of these handles is approximately one hand, and the width of each is two finger-widths.
And when you want to open the bedpan with them, then make the woman sit on the edge of the bed with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her legs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would do with forceps, according to the amount of opening of the bedpan's mouth that you want, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
The form of push or blow with which the person is pushed:
The form of head-butting with which one receives a blow to the head.
And it resembles a forceps with teeth at the ends, just like tongs, and sometimes it is made long like tongs according to this form, just like tongs, which have teeth like saw teeth, with which one cuts and strikes. The form of head-butting a little
The form of an inch with a thorn.
The form of two inches having two thorns
The form of a spatula having two ends, with which the head is split in half.
The form of two wide spatulas.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are and the better they are prepared by the craftsmen, the easier it is for their operation and the more useful they are to men in quantity.
And do not work with these instruments anywhere without being prepared, because the need for them is unavoidable.
Sure, let's translate "De extraccio de la segondina" into English line by line:
Here is the translation of the given text:
And if not, then take an egg and make a hole in the shell, and place in it burning herbs such as calament, rue, hyssop, chamomile, Arabian saffron, and cinnamon. All of these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the eggshell, and place it over the fire.
Then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the patient and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient's body.
Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and on the second night the fever will leave quickly.
But if this treatment is continued and the discharge does not come out, then instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of lilies or an ointment of althea, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second wind, and when you have found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little. But if it is attached in the womb of the patient, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second wind, extract it little by little, straightening it out so that the patient does not suffer from a strong attraction. Before it is necessary that the right and left ribs be adjusted with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is tightened, we have already prescribed the cure with swallowing and with a potion of oil with herbs.
But if it is not completely healed with all the causes we have prescribed, then be careful not to repeat the process of scraping, but rather, make sure that what has come out of her goes into the mother's mouth, and then treat that with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to rot in a few days and will dissolve and be forgotten.
But when it has rotted, there is a very bad odor rising to the head and stomach, which harms the patient; and at that time, it is necessary that appropriate fumigations and remedies be administered for this.
But some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with narcissus and dried figs.
The method of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated must be retained for menstrual periods and the second stage [of childbirth]:
The text seems to be in an old form of Occitan or Provençal, which was a common language in southern France and parts of Italy during the Middle Ages. Let's translate it:
Sure, let's break down this sentence and translate it line by line into English:
"And ensure that smoke is produced until that place [the patient] is smoked out, then do it again.
Of the treatment for an unruptured child's anus.
Many children are born with unperforated anuses, which are subtle and closed. Therefore, the midwife comes to open it with her finger, and if she cannot, she opens it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bowels.
And then place over that wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it might be closed again, then insert a catheter into the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And if closure of the anus occurs due to healing of a wound or abscess; then that healing must be cut open, and then it should be treated with water as we have said for the treatment of lead [poisoning].
Of the treatment for fistulas that form below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part, which are nodular and thick, occur near the anus on the outside or in the space between the buttocks.
"And it is an abscess or boil.
"And when that swelling is chronic and exudes white, watery pus or subtle pus, sometimes some of these abscesses penetrate.
"And those penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through exiting and flatulence; sometimes the patient uses these for exiting, and often vermin come out of them.
"And some of those abscesses sometimes penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the urethra; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the hip, and into the node of the knee.
"And what is known about a penetrating abscess into the anus and non-penetrating is that you insert your finger therein, and then introduce a subtle probe of iron or iron into the abscess when it is not turbid.
"But if there is turbidity in it, then introduce a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
"And if you do not feel it at all or you do not proceed from the orifice any cause of discharge, whether vermin or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and thus approach the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the opening of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prohibition to approach that place with medicine until it has healed.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the sign of this is that the tent seeks entry here, if within it there is not enough firmness in the bone, and causes pain in the surrounding area; and that from it comes gangrene quickly; and that no remedy works on it, nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is not a cure for all, and the cure of those is labor and vanity of the foolish doctors upon whom they are inflicted.
But in those that do not penetrate and are not chronic, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already proven.
And have the patient lie down between your hands on his back and lift up his legs into them, let the thighs be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead tent or of iron if there is firmness in the fistula until you know the place where the tent enters.
And if that is how the patient feels around the neck, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger that the tentacle is already trying to enter by itself and penetrate, or if you feel something between your finger and that, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and at that point do not work on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
However, some say that in some men it heals late.
And of the medicine by which help is expected in him is that you heat a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those carnivorous fistulas resembling a quill of a bird are sufficiently adjusted.
And then cure that with cloths wrapped in soft cloth until all those adjusted tissues are completely healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote the growth and consolidation of the tissue. If it is healed, then good; if not, then it will never be cured by any other treatment.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And then carefully clean those flesh wounds that resemble a quill of a bird, ensuring none of them burst or rupture.
But if blood flow occurs between you and your operation when exploring those wounds, then it is advisable to cauterize with a light instrument, either with fire or with an acute medicine. Cautery with fire has two good effects: it brings the wounds together and causes desiccation of the humors by burning away the moisture.
Then bandage that area with cloth or linen until it reaches the elbow, and then treat the wound with ointments that harden and consolidate the flesh.
And these medicines are characterized by astringency and desiccation; when the wound is restored, it is considered healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends beyond the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And so if you feel the opening and between you and it there is only a thin layer of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it should not be operated on directly but rather by another method with confidence and hope.
This is quite a complex passage dealing with medical treatment for what appears to be an anal fistula or abscess. Here's a line-by-line translation: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is near the end of the rectum around the body surface with the cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated probe, which is like a needle used for preparing hides in this way:
and then insert it wrapped in five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
However, if it penetrates near the edge of the anus deeply inside, then you remove the thread from that opening as you insert your finger into the rectum; and extract the end of the thread and join both ends together, tightening each one, and leave it there for a day or two. And when you have drawn the thread more deeply into the flesh, tighten well so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is drawn in and closes up.
Then care for the wound until it is healed and closed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate by whatever method you have prepared, as long as it is in the flesh, because you should not do this to avoid injuring the skin; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
Based on the context and pattern from the previous sentences, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
"About the stitching of hemorrhoids that bleed during defecation.
"Hemorrhoids can be of two types: either they resemble small black currants or they are like soft grapes. "And of these, some are small and large, and blood always flows from them, it is one drop at a time, and they protrude outside the anus, at its edges.
"However, those that protrude from the anus are of three types: one with little moisture, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously; and according to the color of the skin.
"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and press until the anus comes out and the hemorrhoids appear to you. "Then take hold of them with your fingernails or something similar, and immediately cut them off at their roots.
"But if your fingernails cannot grasp them due to their moisture and softness, then take hold of them with rough cloth or cotton or a woolen strip, and draw them out with the above-mentioned tools, and immediately cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders on them near the incision, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. "And then care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
"And if the feces do not come out, then anoint the patient with castor oil that has a slight laxative effect, and wash them with water that will cause gentle expulsion when the patient is squeezed.
"But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is mild, and it is that you should take them with your finger or with tweezers, insert them back in, and then care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
"And for those who have a prolapse, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the hemorrhoids at the two sides above them. Make the needle penetrate with its point into the edge of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread below the needle, and tie them longitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
"And do this for all of them, and leave one out and do not tie it, so that the excess blood can drain from that one.
And then place a clean cloth infused with rose oil or cerate on the wound, and place that over the coal and instruct the patient to remain still. And then let it sit until it sets; and when it is set, cure that with ointments or another treatment until it is healed.
And because they are old and not suitable for that treatment, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become wet, and remove the scab that forms on top, which prevents their healing; and then cure them until they are healed.
Then you should remove them with a strong poultice, the first time they open and become raw; and then cure them until they are healed.
Know that almesamir is also known as cleft lip, and it is not so unless it appears round according to the color of the body, resembling a garlic clove head, and it occurs throughout the body but mainly in the areas below the feet and the fingers, and because of these pains you should treat them.
And then it is necessary to cut away what is around the nail, and hold it with pincers or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then care for that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the second part as described in the previous chapter.
But a wart is a small, rough, round projection on the surface of the skin, and many are seen in children's hands.
And its treatment is to stretch and cut it, or to strangle it with a thread or a hair that fits through the hole. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small, feathered or large, rough projection on the surface of the skin, and it goes deep into the flesh, and when the cold finds it, it is as if bitten by an ant, and it is found around the body.
And its treatment is to take a quill from the wing of a crow or from the wing of a vulture, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole until the circle of the quill contains all of its parts; then revolve your hand with the quill until you cut away what is around the mole, and press it into the depth of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel in the following manner:
Ensure that the tip of the needle is fine and not sharp, wrapped in such a way that the grasp on it is softened and its rotation is controlled.
And if you wish, cauterize the ants in the same manner as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery for athelia.
Concerning the instruments that are used to give treatment.
Sometimes treatment is given with instruments made of silver, lead, or melted and hammered iron; and sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes according to those to whom they are administered, because that which is used in the care of young children should be small; and for those whose anuses are constricted or painful, the treatment instruments should be small.
The shape of large and few treatments:
The tip of the needle at its top, where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and there should be space between where the bag is tied and the point like this:
And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) and quite long, thinning towards the tip; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the size of the rays and a little larger.
And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and its size should be one palm.
And let it [the bag] be perforated by small holes in this way as it is rolled up; and if the space between the holes is as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is from the same threads or surround them; and attach the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, tightly tie its opening between two points with strong string, and then cauterize each hole with that: But the way to cauterize with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a pillow under them, on which they usually lie or a board; and then coat the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; and then gently insert it into the anus; and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press with force until everything in the bag is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bag and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes him to evacuate, let it be as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
But if you treat him for abdominal pain and his evacuation is slow, then continue to apply the cautery until he is healed.
And if in the rectum there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings, then let it be treated with a very fine and thin cautery, like those used to treat infants.
On treating wounds.
I have already said in the division of wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I say that the treatment should be done with the hand and with medicines according to need.
Therefore, I say that wounds are differentiated according to how the wounds were made and where they occurred on the body.
And the causes for which many wounds are made include cutting by a stone, incision with a sword or knife, striking with a spear, club, arrow, or similar to these many causes.
But the wounds that occur in different parts of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar to those of the limbs.
"And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases so that you may use this reasoning and rule for other diseases as well.
"And I will begin with the simple head diseases, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
"Therefore, I say that when a simple head injury occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and the membrane has only been slightly torn and there is a large wound with fear of an abscess forming, then you should quickly make an incision and bleed the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this. And extract as much blood as the strength of the patient allows, unless some other reason prohibits bleeding, especially if little blood has come out from the wound.
"And let the bleeding be done on the opposite side of the injured part; and keep the patient from filling up with food and drink, especially heavy meals.
"But if some reason prevents bleeding, then let the patient reduce their food intake and avoid meat and wine.
"And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton infused with rose oil or wine that has been boiled down.
"But if you are sure that the abscess is about to burst, then place your hand over the wound. If it is recent, use its own blood and do not change the powder that I will tell you about shortly.
"And if the air has already changed it, then place some ointments on it until it is healed.
"But if the wound is large or caused by a knife or something similar, and its edges are not held together by small fleshy parts, then join them together with a stitch as I will tell you about the method of stitching.
"But if the wound is already open to the bone and marrow, and there is no retention of it except for a small ligament, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place with sutures. And order the patient to be fed on foods that are easy to digest: heads, breasts, and similar things, until it heals.
"And if you find putrefaction in the suture and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that is rotten and wash it, and immediately treat it.
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood could flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should search for the vessel. And if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do something else, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so you sprinkle this powder over them, for when it hardens before the air changes them.
And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part of linseed oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of burnt ochre; let all these be very finely ground and sifted, and with it fill up the plague, and bind it tightly with a good bandage until it adheres well to it and is coagulated with the blood.
Then bind it tightly above with bandages and leave it alone, and do not unbind it until it is healed, for the medicine will not be effective if removed before healing occurs.
And sometimes this remedy alone cures when you do not have linseed oil and dragon's blood at hand.
And you perform the same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place a bandage over them and bind them tightly, and these are recent wounds with blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not suitable for application. Instead, treat them with the water-based ointment we mentioned earlier, or place barley flour paste mixed with water and honey on them until they become dry; then continue treatment with the other remedy until they are healed.
But if the injury is a bone fracture and it's small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures as follows:
Of the neck wounds.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
But if the nerve or artery in the neck has been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no cure for it except to avoid treating it with anything that causes strong constriction, such as ziniar and zegi which are vitriol and similar substances that harm nerves and constrict them. And do not apply any remedy directly onto the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and their extension goes to the brain, which is the most important of all members.
And if it is treated with light medications, such as by washing the wound with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or not, and afterwards when washed with warm water and other soothing ointments applied in this manner, and moist poultices.
If the wound is large, then administer stitches or sew up the lips of it, and then treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the body, causing gangrene, then puncture it in the most depressed area.
But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and blood is flowing, then separate or dry up the area, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
But if the tendons of the throat or all of them have already been cut and the veins of the neck have been saved, then bring together the lips of the wound with a suture on the edge of the throat and do not touch it; first, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for several days; and then treat it with ointments that have astringent and healing properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has penetrated to the bone, then you should puncture it; and if there are bone fragments within it, extract all that you can; and what is not apparent to you, leave until the wound becomes putrid, and separates, and the inflammation of it is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then cure it with water of which the memory will come to you soon in its chapter.
If it is a puncture from a lance or sword and you see its depth, then consider more if there is an air leak when the patient inhales; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then in the first hour you should sprinkle over it powder, and do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient; rather, apply an attractive ointment on it, and repeat this two times a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should place over the orifice of the wound a piece of wool so that it draws out water from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the water in it drains out.
Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts and translate it line by line:
"But if the healing of the patient is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that an abscess has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its nature.
"And if the wound is caused by a knife or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been used to clean the surgical instruments before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
"But if it has already affected the bone, and you see pieces of bone coming out, then you should turn the wound and use forceps to remove those pieces, if they are separated. "But if the bone fragments are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, making their removal easier.
"And for other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
"Of the wounds of the abdomen.
"The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
And a small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and I know that their reduction is even more difficult if you do not cut into the opening of it immediately, because it swells and becomes thickened, making its repair difficult.
Therefore, the best rupture is the smaller one, because in this case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the stitching of the belly is done in four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds of the body.
And the other two stitches are more appropriate for other wounds, but they are even more suitable for the stitching of the belly.
And I will explain to you each one with an explanation and description.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflated by the cold air.
And therefore, when it is so, then you must scrape that area until you submerge a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone, or mix the following in cold water: cumin, pepper, thyme, and marjoram, with which you should wash the intestine until the swelling has subsided.
And sometimes this works better in cases where there is bleeding, and it is better for the resolution of the swelling than water alone.
And therefore, when you see the swelling has subsided, then wet the intestine with water in which there is marjoram and mallow, for this will relieve his discomfort with little harm.
But if the patient's discomfort is not relieved by this treatment, then cut open the swelling slightly with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not severe, so that there is no need for cutting and no weakness or debilitation.
About the instrument, see its shape:
One part of it is sharply curved, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip should be thin but not as sharp as a knife, instead it should be blunt at the end.
And therefore, when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine has come out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on top of this, because it is better.
But when the opening is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and lift their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should lift the patient's head and feet higher than the affected area.
Similarly, if the opening is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your intention and attention focused on making the side with the wound higher than the other side.
And thus you should apply this method to both large wounds and smaller ones.
And in small wounds, ensure that what is ready is prepared, and then make sure the minister is between your fingers, holding the entire opening with their hand and bringing its lips together, and then discover if there is any other cause for another stitch.
Here's the translation of the sentence:
Sure, here's the translation of the given sentence:
And let the needles be mid-sized between coarseness and finesse, because fine needles cut the flesh too lightly; and the coarse ones enter the vein with difficulty, so it is necessary that they are mid-sized in both fineness and coarseness.
And it is not advisable for the needle to be placed at the two ends of the vein too closely, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound opens before healing properly.
And do not prolong the stitching, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during sleep; and place over the stitching expanded pulp of all kinds, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound has already healed.
And this kind of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because in their stitching only one or two needles are used, or around that number.
However, the second type of stitch is common: and it is that you administer the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the thread, all at once, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped equally in fineness and coarseness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, remove the needle from the same point where it began, so that the thread can be pulled back up through the wound, making the stitching similar to sewing cloth together which is securely tightened.
And place between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
And this method is known to men.
And with this stitching I sutured the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been struck by a sword, and the opening of the wound was greater than a palm's width, and about two palms of the intestines had come out around the middle part, and the tearing was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned that which had come out of the wound after twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he recovered; and then he lived for many years after that, and is well in his habits.
And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was, for I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment or any medicine could not be found, but I placed two old towels over the wound twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
"But I will speak of two types of proper sutures according to the account of [name].
And it is that you begin with the suture from the outside, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so, as the needle penetrates the skin and through that same stitch, straight and long throughout the entire body, you leave the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the middle.
And when you have made that penetration, then you make the other penetration again in that same extremity of the middle from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
And make that penetration with that same thread, with which you have made all the previous penetrations, into the end of the thread that is on the inside.
And then begin from this same side and sew with that end of the thread on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin that has been penetrated, and then return that to the skin and sew the end of the thread that is on the other side with this end of the thread; and extract that from the skin that is on the patient's side.  /> And now you have two stitches made in this manner: one from outside to inside and the other from inside to outside, with each end of the thread being secured on either side.
And do this one time and another, and do it one time near another time until you remove everything that is outside according to that example.
And the summary of this method of suturing is that you should sew with a skin stitch with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew one time from the side of the end of the thread and leave that other time until it is complete.
However, the second type of suture, which they call Wallia, and this is its method and thus I recommend it, is that you sew with a half-thread stitch with which some doctors sew, so that they bring all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the end of one thread and the end of the other to the opposite end of the thread, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Ensure that you place the needle in the end of the thread closest to your dominant hand outside the part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that single point, leaving two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside at two points of the thread.
And then turn those cushions, and make each one penetrate from the inside part of the body to the outside part in two opposite extremities of the mentioned area.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture for which preceding mention was made.
This is the speech of Galen
And others may say that suturing the abdomen is done with two needles, so you insert a thread into each one of them, and begin by inserting the needle on the side where you should, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suture method used for equal hearts.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment of wound treatment is the same as that for other wounds.
This is because when you get a fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines to their place and suture it properly, then place over it carnivorous powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that wound thick ointments which are at your disposal until they form a hard crust and close the wound; and ensure it is cured and well monitored; and then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it heals.
But if the necessary medicines are not present, then apply this promptly as soon as it starts to ooze pus and blood, changing it two times a day, as you have been taught, until it heals. This is because in simple wounds no other preparation is needed besides bandaging them properly.
But if you fear that the wound may affect the main members, then it is necessary for you to soak wool in high-quality oil or rosemary oil and place it around the joints between the ribs and under the armpits.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which often happens, then treat it with black henbane steeped in wine, especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the cavity of the intestine.
And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of lighter healing than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine that is called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it and their magnitude, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is the flesh, and you obtain that part fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that with honey on the place that is discolored by it, so that blood flow will come, for in the flesh there are veins and arteries.
And then you should cut out that which is another lament, and place two ends of the honey hanging from the exit of the wound, so that the attraction of it will be relieved upon you, and for the holding of the flesh and the emission of the branch of the wound.
"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestines.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some men, because I have seen that person who was struck in their stomach with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become an old fistula, and from him there came out intestines and wind.
Therefore, I proceeded with his treatment, not that he was not yet cured, but I continued to care for him until the inside had been healed and the area was consolidated.
And I, having seen the area already consolidated, ordered that the patient should expect some misfortune in his stomach; and no one expected any misfortune, and he was eating and drinking in his usual manner, and then he entered the bath and was exercised as prescribed.
And some experienced people said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: and that is to take large-headed ants; and then bring together the two lips of the wound and place one ant from those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so that when it bites on them it strengthens its mouth, and cuts off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing them one after another according to the entire area of the wound.
And then sew up that [area] and close the wound, and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with thin thread made from the attached animal intestine, because it is more like a needle; and you should take the end of this intestinal thread and make sure it is very clean, then tie its end with another piece of thread, wrap it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine with it, reducing it in the rupture.  [This passage describes a technique for surgically repairing an intestinal perforation or hernia.]
And this method of suturing with ants is not anything more than a way of trust and hope. [This passage suggests that the use of ants for wound closure was not a reliable or proven technique.]
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is only a slight cut, and it will not heal completely. [This passage explains that certain wounds, particularly those in the thin intestines, are too severe to be closed with ants and will not fully heal.]
"About the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
"Know that any sore or abscess that becomes old and chronic, forming an ulcer that does not heal and keeps growing over time without being cut open, is universally called a fistula regardless of which limb it is on. We call this hemorrhoids.
"And a fistula in truth is a knotty, hard, white growth with no pain associated, and it has a cavity like the cavity of a bird's bone; and because of this, that ulcer is named 'rizatz', which means 'bone marrow'.
"And there are in some people a moist ulcer that grows over time; and very quickly the moisture is removed within a few hours. "And sometimes this moisture moves, and it is scarce, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
"Already all those causes, and the signs of them and their cures with medicines are explained in the division.
"And it is fitting that I make you know the cure for the fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
"And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body, for there are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the joints composed like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that give proximity to the principal member and resemble it.
"Therefore, among these fistulas, those of this kind are among the most difficult to heal diseases, and they do not receive a cure, and dealing with them is work and ignorance.
"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you expect and hope for its cure, and you wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, explore it with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a delicate lead probe, for lead, due to its lightness of body, is easily guided and curved according to the twist.
But if the fistula has terrible growths, it is not within your power to investigate it with a probe.
Therefore, irrigate the orifices one by one, for the moisture with which you irrigate will also pass through the other orifices and run out of them.
And then inquire very carefully, as far as it is possible for you to know, whether here there are bones or nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or close at hand; if it is a fistula with many orifices that appears entirely under your power, use your inquiry along with all your strength, with your investigation of the patient, and discover the cause of the pain through your pressure with your hand on the area, and consider the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have stood firm on all these causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and that is, consider whether the fistula appears near or far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
And then you dry the fistula as previously described in the patient's narrative, and remove whatever is in that filtration and of rotting flesh, and whatever has grown in the orifices of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar substances, and cure the inside so that it may heal.
But if the fistula is of great depth, and according to the straight path, then it is necessary that you insert that [tool] into the wound as deeply as possible, and then cleanse it of all its rotting flesh; and then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have enclosed with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal from this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you encounter any cause such as a vein or a nerve or a main member as we have said.
"However, if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackening in it, then you should scrape that area until all of the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water to help it heal.
"And if it does not heal and continues to discharge in the same way, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated all of the corruption; therefore, you must uncover it again and perform a more careful and thorough cleansing of it with the strongest force available, and then restore that area.
"And thus, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the deepest recesses of the body, which cannot be reached, and therefore you are powerless to do anything about it.
"And if the bone is slightly corrupt and you are able to remove it, then do so using fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
"And if there are many bones, then you must carefully remove all of them, and leave not even a trace of any with your strength.
"However, if any cause of humidity gives you difficulty, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Sure, let's translate this sentence line by line:
Here's the line-by-line translation:
Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Based on the pattern and vocabulary used in the previous text, here's my attempt at translating this line:
A young man around 30 years old experienced pain in his chest, and from the inner parts, an abscess formed within the body until the abscess reached the chest, and it is a case of a large abscess, with no external cause.
And so the time was extended with that [abscess] due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and various substances were discharged from him. His treatment was then stopped until his thigh was made into a fistula, and in him there appeared orifices that all secreted pus and the humors of the body.
And then a multitude of doctors cared for him for about two years, and none of them knew more than the art, until I was called upon.
And I saw his thigh and the substances that flowed from him through those large orifices; and the body of that man was all swollen, and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices, and the probe reached the bone.
And then I probed all the orifices and found that they extended from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised into one of those orifices, and I discovered a section of bone that was corrupt, blackened, and rotten; and already a portion of the thigh was corrupt where it had penetrated to the marrow.
And then I sawed off what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather the corruption which I had cut out and sawed off, and I had already removed it.
And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I probed and further exposed the bone according to the initial discovery, and I found that the corruption continued with the bone.
And I sawed off what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was forced to abandon the treatment and healing of it, as it did not heal.
And then I exposed it again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little, particularly, and forced its healing, but it did not heal until I incised around a palm's width of it, from which I extracted the marrow. Then I healed that part with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and cured.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and incision of him except for the disposition of his fragility and the scarcity of his tolerance and his fear of death, because lethargy befalls him at all hours due to an excess of poor evacuation.
Therefore, he is healed through complete healing, and there is nothing hard or bony left; the disposition of his body has been well-done and his strength returns; he can move about without any problems or harm in any regard.
But if there is bone protruding from the already injured part of the body, then you should cut it like this: take a strong linen bandage and tie it tightly around the protruding bone at its extremity; have someone pull on the other end of the bandage to stretch it out; then wrap a thicker woolen bandage over the first bandage; then press down on the flesh that is beneath the bone, extending the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart and expose the flesh in the area where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
And place a stick or board underneath the bone securely, for when you do this, it is not permitted that the saw cuts into the corrupt flesh.
And it is necessary that the locking be done little by little on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then another lock will be needed for him at another time.
And if the bone is not prominent and there are two affected parts close to each other, or the corruption is in the middle of them, then you should uncover all the flesh from both parts; and then place a stick under [them], and then saw the one from the first part until the sawing reaches the second part.
And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut open that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it connects to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the connection between two joints, then it is not reasonable but ingenious.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must seek to understand how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with each ingenious device rectify it as best you can, when there is no vein or nerve in opposition.
And you should know that the incisors and saws used for cutting these bones are tools according to the position of the bones, their preparation, size, delicacy, largeness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of suitable instruments for each operation.
And know that this operation depends on you regarding the type of instrument you need; since you have great study, experience, and knowledge in the ways of this art, and are familiar with various diseases, you should apply what is appropriate from the instruments for each disease.
And I, having taught you at the end of this chapter, will list the instruments that you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Shape of a saw:
Shape of another saw:
Large shape of another saw:
Shape of a file: Its head should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its points should be like the points of an awl.
And it is not advisable to rub only with cold water the heads of the joints when they are inflamed, or if the opening is very large.
A smaller form of razor
A flat form of razor
A well-made saw with a curved shape above the iron part, and the wooden handle is also well-made. Its shape
A form of razor that has a concavity
Another thin form of razor
A curved-tip razor
A small, tentacle-like razor
Another smaller form of incisor
The shape of another incisor; this one resembles a saw, with its tip like a blade, and is used in many places on the bones.
The shape of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones
And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
It is made of Indian iron, and similarly, it should meet all the requirements we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws.
"About the extremities and the locking of the bones.
"The extremities can be injured by intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated the corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption may go to a member that has not been affected by any cause. Then it is necessary for you to incise that member until the place where the corruption is located, so that the patient can avoid death or great harm to the member.
"And the sign of one who has this happen is that the member turns black, as if fire had burned it, or you may see the blackness spread to other members until the whole body is affected; and thus you should diagnose this with an incision.
"Similarly, if the corruption is caused by a strike from some venomous things, such as a sea scorpion or viper or rat, and so forth.
"And if the corruption or strike is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread to the hand.
And similarly, if you approach the hand, then cut it from the back of the forearm, and do not allow corruption until it takes hold in the arm's forearm.
And if you cut that off, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes and goes around the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other remedy for that condition is a waste of effort.
And similarly, do the same with the foot when corruption reaches the top of the foot, then cut it off at one of the toes.
And if it spreads to the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot. But if it ascends into the shin, then you should cut the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has already spread over the shin, then in that case there is no hope but to let the patient die.
And the manner of cutting off or sawing the member is that you should tighten a ligature above where you want to cut, and tie another ligature over the spot; and let the assistant extend a ligature below the parts, and let the assistant place another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures until it is entirely exposed; and then it should be cut off or sawed.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all parts so that the healthy area does not touch and that the injured patient receive an accurate incision and cautery.
But if blood flows when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully, or place some powder that restrains the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the afflicted member with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if you encounter this in a man's foot, the accident which I and you have discussed, which is when he feels darkness in his foot from the burning, similar to the burning of fire.
And that corruption first occurs in the toe until it affects the entire foot.
And then that man prepares for himself some pus, which goes to the cure of the member with great vehemence, and it consumes that foot up to the joint, and he becomes cured.
For a long time, that same corruption occurs in the toe of his left hand.
And then he came to me, and I resolved to expel that superfluity with water that I poured over the hand of medicines, so that the body of him was cleansed; but the superfluity was not expelled and began to go to the other toe until it began in the hand.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And since he has recovered from me, he has returned to his land and it was reported to me that the man has prepared and healed his entire hand.
I have included this account only to serve as guidance on this disease, and to be a sign by which it may be identified and accordingly treated.
On the care of sinews and the quality of enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended until it collects pus, and then it breaks and ruptures, and the pus comes out, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is also like a thin cloth, and it has not reached deeper corruption, and does not touch the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula.
However, if the space is extended until it touches some corruption in a member, then it is called a fistula and not sinew.
And its treatment is that you should cut off all that skin just as it has been rolled up, especially when it is thin and like a cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And consider the abdomen, and if it is large, and the arm that you have is foul-smelling, then enema that area with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel, and heat them over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take from him the amount of water necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema him with that in his abdomen, and strengthen his orifices, and let the medicine act on him for the duration of two hours.
Then extract it with a probe; and do this for as many days until the abdomen is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes he is enemaed with ashes water, when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of vines, and put water on them; and then strain that and enema him with it until you are sure that his abdomen is cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes water, then enema him with water and honey mixed with a little vinegar, and enema him with vinegar and honey mixed together, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar binds the abdomen, especially when in the vinegar there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and realize that the swelling has subsided, then irrigate him with water that promotes the growth of flesh in him.
And take some of the ointment called diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar; or irrigate him with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the swelling is too narrow to admit the canula for irrigation, then you should widen it little by little with a hot iron, and place in it a garlic clove wrapped in Egyptian ointment or Basilicum ointment until it is widened.
Similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together its lips with a stitch and leave it in that state for as long as is necessary for the irrigation without addition.
And if the opening from which the arm hangs is elevated above the parts below it, then dry that with a poultice in the lowest part of it so that the arm may go back inside, for when the arm is constricted by the swelling, flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone by draining pus, then prepare the member with the preparation that allows the arm to move lightly as it seems appropriate and there should be no retained cause in the arm.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, you should always keep it there so that what is blocked in his arm may be released. And to know if what comes out of his arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the area of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess present.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been deposited on the opening of the sinus already adheres or begins to adhere more firmly, then on the second or third day you should separate the skin, and when you separate the wound, replace the cloth with another one and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus comes out a small amount of subtle fluid, then do not despair about its adherence, for its healing is proper. For there are some people in whom the growth of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and likewise there are those in whom the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for several days comes out undigested food, then know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should aim to dry the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be made dry as with ointment diapalma, when there is an excess of the addition of egg yolk.
And the most effective remedy for the one who is being treated is to take some of the ointment called difenicon, dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound as an ancient salve. Then complete this process with him and use it.
And already act in that way when the arm is broken: take ointment called difenicon and mix it with wax until it becomes thick, then use it; or take myrrh, aloe, and cinnamon, grind them all into a powder and sprinkle over the wax while heating on the fire, then lay it out on a cloth and strengthen that over the wound; and lay that with the wax you have mixed until it becomes thick, and sprinkle it on a cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes it is administered to him with long-haired aristolochia and lily celestial roots (and it is lily celestial), and wild oat flour and centaurium, and use these simple or compound ingredients: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the wax you have mixed; then use it.
And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in his flesh, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat him with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
Based on the context and similarity to Latin, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Panarici is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it quickly spreads to other fingers or toes. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is less valued, or it can become an abscess from an abscess, or it can become corrupted, throwing pus into the nail bed, quickly corrupting the entire nail, and eventually reaching the bone, causing a foul odor. The end of the finger turns black, and its color becomes dark.
Therefore, when you have treated the affected area as we have said in the division and your treatment is not working, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluous parts that remain of the nail and then cauterize the wound accordingly, because cautery is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the protruding parts of the nail are already compressing the flesh within and begin to prick and hurt it, then it is necessary that you place a thin piece of linen under the corner of the nail that hurts the flesh, push the flesh out and cut it easily; then apply corrosive medicines on what remains of the flesh until everything is removed; and then treat that with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you must cut out that bone and remove it, because no time will heal if the bone is corrupt.
And if you see the corruption and decay spreading to the fingers, then cut off that finger at one of its joints according to the customary method, and then care for it until it is healed.
But if there is a blow or crush to the nail, and intense pain results from it, then you should first bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut at its base, being careful that the cut does not reach the flesh below the nail, for this will cause the patient intense pain and will be the cause of excessive growth of the adjacent skin in that place; and then treat that area with water that relieves pain.
But this excessive growth, which is common in the hands of many men, is very painful in all its parts, and very painful in the bones or in the nails.
And some of them are born at the base of the joint, or their growth is in some of the aforementioned joints. Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
"And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is that you must make the incision with a Latin spatula.
"But of those born into the narrowness of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of their incision.
"But in the case of those born with knuckles, you must first make a round incision into the flesh at the beginning, near the bone, and then cauterize it with one of those appropriate irons for this purpose, so that it may be healed from within.
"But consolidation that occurs in the said joints due to birth defects or injuries, whether by fire burn or similar causes, then you must cut through this consolidation until the joints return to their natural shape.
"And then place between their bandages of infused oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is consolidated as needed.
"And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then you should cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Certainly! Let's break down the text step by step:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the context and the patterns observed in the previous lines, here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
This sentence describes two different methods for treating a patient who has been wounded by an iron object. The first method involves making incisions and removing the black blood, while the second method requires raising the vein and extracting all of it.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And then tie it [the bandage], and command the patient to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods.
And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full, and this will be noted by the patient.
But their elevation should be done in this manner: you who are treating the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave the hair off; then bathe the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins become swollen; or if there is no bath present, have the limb exercised vigorously until it becomes numb.
And then dry the cord to the right of the vein by incision in the shank or the back of the calf, or in the lower part towards the heel.
And then open the cord with scissors and peel away the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and this perception is that which those who practice this request by turning black.
And so when you see the white thread coming out of the cord, you know it is a cord.
And then place that thread under until it is lifted and thrown out of the cord, and suspend that with an empty needle.  (The phrase "orp leon" seems to be a mistake or corruption; the intended phrase might have been something like "am una linea", meaning "with a string".)
And then make another incision near that one for three fingers' width, and then cut the cord of the separated part above the vein until it appears.
And then raise it and incise it in the posterior cut towards the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it comes out through the second cut, and then extract it from the cut that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the highest or most superior cut of all, until it is completely removed; and then incise that part.
And if it does not obey you and cannot be extracted and raised, then insert a double-pointed needle with a strong thread and tie it off, and extract it, or insert a reed and move your hand in all directions until it is ejected. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to raise that part and it will come back upon the patient with that harm.
And when you have completely removed it, then place over the wound site wool soaked in oil and undiluted oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the bladder is contracted with tortuousness in which there are wrapped parts and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along its entire length of tortuosity and at the wrapped places. Then suspend it by hooks until you lift it completely.
And be careful with your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; and preserve your skill in this.
Shape of the incision used to cut the bladder:
It is not sharp like a hook nor does it have a pointed tip so that the vein is not harmed; and it should be thick and flexible, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there should be an extra thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein originates in the thighs in hot lands, such as in the region of Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is neither grass nor trees.
And this pain can also be generated in other parts of the body besides the hips.
And its origin in him is putrefaction, which comes from the intestines like snakes and worms that generate inside the body, causing ulcers and worms between the intestines and the flesh.
And the sign of its coming is this: that there appears in the thigh a violent inflammation, and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to come out from that blister, like a root of a plant.
And when its tip appears, then you should wrap around it a lead weight that weighs between one and two pounds, secure it in place, and let the lead hang from the thigh.
And each time you see any part of it coming out for some reason, wrap that part in lead and secure it. And if it is prolonged, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part; do not cut it straight away until it has come out, because if you cut it while it is still inside, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in that place and a bad ulcer.
Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And from this vein, it has emerged in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has come to my attention that one has emerged of twenty palms.
And if it has been cut during the time of treatment, then insert the ray into its opening and make a long hole through to the body, until all that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; then cure it with the remedy for apostemes.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him with many openings, and it emerges from each opening as a branch.
And therefore cure it in the same way as we have said in the division, and with that which has been said above.
On the cutting of worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle sickness.
This sickness is called in some lands cattle sickness because often it happens to cows and there are few worms, one of which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body ascending and descending, and shows its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And his condition is due to the putrefaction of some humors, similar to how worms, snakes, leeches, and roundworms infest the belly.
And it is feared because of his malice, for when he goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the eye, then he swiftly enters and destroys the eye, and this causes many troubles.
And therefore, when you want to cure him and remove him, it cannot be done unless you know his movement and appearance from the senses. Then you must hold strongly that which is above him and that which is below him with a bandage and tight constriction. And then dry it over him and extract him.
And if he is lodged in the flesh and you cannot find him, then you place a cautery with fire over the area where he dwells until he dies. And the greatest cause of concern is his corruption, which corrupts the place as we have said.
But if you see him reaching the head near the eye, then hold the eyelid with a strong constriction, and dry it over him, and extract him; and it is necessary for the patient to use purifying medicines for the body that evacuate bad putrid humors, and he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir" can be translated as follows:
This malady is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain members, and it is often transferred from one member to another.
And I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you about. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after she removed her blouse, I saw a small inflammation on the main vein of her arm. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm going upwards, but more gently than being a flea, as if it were live silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location and settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she reported to me that it was running through her whole body as I saw, and I was greatly amazed at the change in it and its speed from one member to another. And I had already seen something like this before in my own hands, but I had never seen pain itself being transferred from one limb to another. "But I do not see this similarly in women.
"And I do not think it is anything other than the fact that the woman was old, with thin bodies and exposed veins, and in this condition she felt that swelling.
"And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and with moist veins.
"And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear to the eye as we have said; then you strengthen over that area and leave it lightly and briefly until the swelling has subsided, and cauterize the spot.
"But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that [patient] with purging of the body and with things that expel swellings, and cure him with stinking pills and with serpentine pills.
"About the removal of arrows.
"Arrows are varied according to their types and the places of the body where they strike, for their diversity is that some have large tips, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, solid ones; and others have three angles, and some have tongues, while others have barbs.
And of the signs of death when an arrow falls on him and pierces the bone, and exits through the fontanel which is above the brain, for it happens by a sudden and violent attack, and fainting, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile, and his speech is cut off strongly, and his voice is destroyed, and from the place of the wound comes out white moisture resembling dust, and his eyes resemble the wateriness of flesh.
And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
But the signs of an arrow hitting the heart are as follows: it is close to the left breastbone, and you can feel that it has struck something hard, not soft; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and coldness in the extremities, and foaming at the mouth, and fainting; and thus know that death is certain.
And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: foaming of blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they take short, quick breaths, and ask for cold air to be drawn into their mouth.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the feet, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is a great deal of pain with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are not well at all.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then food will come out of the wound that has not been digested.
And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and remains inside, there should be some opening of the wound or the fabric, or the intestine that has been torn, and there is no hope for the patient's recovery without removing the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine is exiting, and there are any signs of infection outside the body, and the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that this condition is fatal.
However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their attachments, the vertebrae of the back, the collarbone, the hip, the thighs, and similar parts of the body are saved according to the best methods when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand their treatment accordingly.
The reason for this is that I once treated a man who had an arrow lodged in his tear duct near the root of his nose. I removed it from the other side, leaving only the arrowhead behind his ear, and he recovered with no damage to his eye.
This sentence appears to describe the removal of an arrow from someone's eye, with specific details about the arrow and its condition. Here is a line-by-line translation:
Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation for the given sentence:
And I extracted another arrow from a man called Crestia, which had been shot into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow and it is the one with golden shafts; then I cut into that area between two veins, as it was submerged in his throat; then I carefully removed it with it, and then I extracted it, and thus Crestia was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had been shot into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days passed and there was no change in his condition, I cut into the arrow and hooked it out, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound became infected on him. After about seven years, the arrow came out through the flesh of the wound.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was shot into her belly, and the wound became infected inside her, and there was no change in her condition at all, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man into whom an arrow was shot in the face, and the wound became infected and the arrow broke, but he felt no pain, and similar things happened to these.
And you will extract the arrow from the man of the king's soldiers who was stuck in the middle of his nose and had deviated slightly to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
And I was called to care for him soon after the arrow entered three days ago.
And then I found the arrow's wound very narrow; and then I inquired about it with a fine probe, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was from the tip of the arrow.
And I plastered the area with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, expecting that the location would soften so that the arrow's position would become clear to me, causing it to dry out over it.
And no significant accident occurred in that location which would indicate that the arrow had reached there; and I continued with the ointment on it for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound had healed over time, and the patient recovered from the extraction for several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me this.
And then I applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up. With a probe, I searched for it and found the tip of a subtle arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it passed through for a period of four months.
And after the wound was widened and I was able to insert forceps into it, and it remained in that state without any obstruction, then I did not cease to refine and devise various methods for it until one day I managed to extract it using finely made forceps, as will be described later in this chapter. And after that, I restored the wound.
And although some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was cured completely without any setbacks.
And I recount to you the methods of extracting some arrows so that you may understand and learn what has not been said, for the principles of this art and its definitions cannot be understood through mere narrative nor can they be learned from books alone.
This sentence is discussing the work of skilled artisans and their comparison between the present and absent states, as well as their discovery of new operations and instruments to deal with external causes affecting their craft. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And thus I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are embedded except by two methods: either by attracting the place where they enter, or by pulling on the opposite side.
And that which is thrown into the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy part, and is pulled out and removed.
And if it does not obey the extraction at the time when it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are facilitated.
Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat this with attraction and moisture each day, until it is removed.
And if it does not obey your extraction after some days, then you must pierce the area around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
However, if the arrow is hidden within the body and cannot be felt, then you should investigate with a probe. If you feel it, then use various instruments appropriate for its removal.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound or the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is wide enough to remove the arrow.
And if the arrow is lodged in the ears, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides with all the skill you can muster; and work on that, until you can free the arrow by cutting through the ear cartilage and twisting it out.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if you cannot do it at that moment, then let the patient rest for some days until the affected areas can be relieved, and then repeat the treatment when they are alleviated. But if there is an opposing flow of blood, then administer the remedy mentioned in its respective chapter.
And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer the remedy in all possible ways to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and steadiness as I and you have agreed upon.
Therefore, perform the procedure opposite to the arrow's path, so that the patient matches the figure according to which you should insert the arrow in them, as this is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But if the arrow has been dislodged from the opposite side of the affected part, or if any part has already protruded from the wound site, or if the tip of the arrow is swollen due to the presence of a foreign body above the cord, then you should apply pressure on that area; and let the incision be made according to the size in which the forceps can grasp; and then remove it, as it has been made lightly for extraction.
Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
And if not, leave that for some days, and then repeat it until it works.
If the arrow's shaft is still in there, then you should remove it along with it.
But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer an incision, then you should introduce that [instrument] into the wound, making it convex so that the concavity of the instrument fits around the end of the arrow, and then remove it along with it.
But if the arrow is barbed, then you should remove it using a strong instrument that goes deeply into the wound, because the arrow is lodged there.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should scrape away all the flesh in which the venom is located, if possible, and then treat it with the appropriate remedy.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it, taking care not to cut a vein or nerve, and remove the arrow, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Their tips are like the beak of a bird, made with teeth similar to a saw, which grip onto the arrow to prevent it from slipping out.
And from these are made many species, large, few and thin, according to the size of the arrow and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
like a tooth, to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and be pushed out with it.
Of phlebotomy of veins.
The veins for phlebotomy are 32 in total, of which there are 16 in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins on each temple; and two veins on each lacrimal of the eyes, known as aspicientz. There is also a vein in the middle of the forehead, one at the tip of the nose, two jugular veins at the neck, two veins above the upper lip, two below the lower lip (these are called algelic), and two veins under the tongue. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Certainly! Let's translate the provided medieval medical text line by line:
The healing of veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
And the method of bleeding those veins is as I will explain to you: It should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth and good friction; Then bind the patient's head tightly with a bandage so that both [veins] and their locations are near the ears on two depressed areas of the head; And you will seek them with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is the sign to attempt [the bleeding].
Then you take the lancet, and it is sharpened, and then you insert that under the vein until the blade reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the skin above it, and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be approximately the width of two fingers, or around that; and allow as much blood to come out as you wish.
And then strengthen with poultices and let it heal inside.
And already in the beginning of this book, I have mentioned them and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the one that helps with bloodletting is for chronic migraines and severe headaches, and for frequent eye disorders, as well as acute swelling in the hands.
And the manner of bloodletting these veins is as I advise you: press on the patient's neck until the two veins can be felt by touch and are clearly visible; and then feel their pulse with your finger, and then you will know.
Then you lift the skin over the vein with your index finger, and insert the bloodletting instrument underneath, and raise the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then release the constriction on the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultices over it, strengthening it with a strong bandage, and let it heal inside.
And already has been mentioned them, and of these the explanation, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic for ancient diseases of the face and for migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the nature of its phlebotomy is as I have told you; that is, let the patient tighten his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a "fossor," and this is what it looks like:
Place the point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a weight or with another cause in this manner, allowing the blood to run according to the amount you want; and then unbind the perforation from the patient and tighten it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad phlebotomy, but it does not matter that the phlebotomy is of an acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, instead it should be of a broad extremity, and let it be cut according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong, it would break in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
"But the treatment for the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes due to the itchiness of the eyes from heat and pus in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
"And the way to perform bloodletting is for the patient to hold their head with a bandage, and then you perform bloodletting on them, while standing over their head.
"And the bloodletting should be done along the length of the limb with small incisions, because there is little flesh in that area; and if the incision is too fine, the end of it will be easily torn.
"And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and place a bandage on it, and hold it for one night, and then remove it.
"But bloodletting from the nose vein is appropriate for acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial illnesses and migraines with heat in the face, especially when it is chronic.
"And the way to perform bloodletting from it is for the patient to hold their head and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a fine long lancet and place it in the middle of the tip of the nose along its length, because the vein does not appear to be sensitive here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Certainly! Here's the translation for the provided text:
Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
And the nature of this phlebotomy is that the patient lies down on each side with their hands tied behind their back; and let the surgeons be positioned above the patient's head, while the patient sits upright on a stool.
And then perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a wide phlebotomy knife little by little; and then extract blood in accordance with the determined quantity or according to how many times it is necessary for that; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then untie the bindings and tightly bandage the two veins so that the patient is not weakened, and allow them to rest until morning when the wound has healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy on the leg veins includes curing small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, evil ulcers and fissures, and evil ulcers that are on the nose and around it.
And the nature of this phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips inside out and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication of each is by the darkness of both, and this is because around them are small black veins; and then cut each with an incising cut.
If doubt exists within you and you do not know which of them it is, then you should proceed to incise the largest and most apparent of them.
And make an incision in both veins that are located on the lips above.
However, for the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy is more appropriate at the cephalic vein, which is preferred for conditions of the uvula and other mouth diseases.
The method of phlebotomizing them is as follows: have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look underneath it; on one side you will see one vein and on the other side another vein, and each will be tending towards blackness in color.
Then bleed each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand on the bleeding of those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are customary for all men, and their phlebotomy is done in two ways: either they place with the phlebotomy needle myrtle oil or olive oil subtly; or cut with a phlebotomy knife, and it is called thus: alnessil. And this is its form:
Sure, let's try to translate the given sentence:
And this phlebotomy is of smaller size and more subtle extremity, suitable for phlebotomy of the small veins that contain refined blood.
But the advantage of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it extracts blood from patients who are below the elbow and the collarbone, and from those whose feet and belly swell.
It is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs or presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this phlebotomy with a pointed fleam, but rather first cut with a scalpel.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary for you to leave that place and move to another, or look for some branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because there it is clearly visible; and puncture it with a scalpel as we have said.
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that sentence:
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the area you have marked with a point, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and press your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood is stopped, because many times it will be stopped, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And watch over the patient to prevent infection, and be concerned for him, and do not move him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and you see that you have no remedy for this, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take a fistula scourer, and make it, and take one half and tighten that over the vein with stricture, decent bandage and wool until another day.
And then if the blood is cut off, it's good; otherwise, cure it with the water that preceded the memory of the place where the powder was cutting off the flow of blood.
And the severing of his blood is difficult in many arrangements due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the arm being bound.
However, venipuncture is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic [vein], as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be very careful during his phlebotomy because beneath that [vein] there is a nerve; and if he hits this nerve with the needle, a stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps he will not heal completely. And these nerves are often apparent in sensation; and if they are hidden in some people and are subtle and do not appear, then you should place the phlebotomy needle with which you are performing phlebotomy between the veins and avoid the nerve with your skillfulness.
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
"The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and helps heal eye diseases.
"And it is particularly relevant in this case: if you want to perform phlebotomy, do so with an olive-shaped fleam or a myrtle-shaped one; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves left behind.
"However, it is very dangerous if there is an abscess in some men when they are not phlebotomized at the first percussion; but do not touch that abscess.
"The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope for the patient's well-being, and to prevent illnesses from occurring. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins in the arm: cephalic, dark, or basilic. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring while fasting, or in autumn and winter near a meal when there are signs of fullness.
And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or during the first few hours of the morning,
And phlebotomy that is administered should only be done when it is convenient and necessary, whether by night or by day, at any time.
And children should not be subjected to phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old; pregnant women should not undergo phlebotomy except between the fourth and seventh months; and those over sixty years of age should not be subjected to it either.
And if someone wants to be subjected to phlebotomy in any way, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before the phlebotomy with a cleansing enema, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not expel the impurities of the intestines during the phlebotomy, which are corrupt and harmful to the main members.
And patients with certain diseases such as seasickness or drunkenness should not be subjected to phlebotomy until the cause has been removed, nor those suffering from dropsy; and phlebotomy should especially be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent coitus, labor, fasting, vigils, and all causes that weaken the virtue, whether bodily or mental.
And then carefully consider the humoral imbalance before that; if the blood is thick, use food and drink, and with medicines if it is necessary for that.
And then enter the bath if there are no contraindications, or exercise through some movement to make the blood thinner.
And perform phlebotomy on them at the end of the day, preferably around the third hour, as we have said.
And ensure that the feet of the patient are protected from all animal accidents on that day, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, excessive pain, sex, and their likenesses.
And at the conclusion, ensure that the causes are present in the use of which men commonly resort with aromatics and fragrances, as well as balms and similar items according to their availability.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the one the patient sits on.
Then remove the patient's arm and rub it with your hand two or three times, phlebotomist. Then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around two times.
And if the stricture is temperate, because when the stricture is not equal or there is excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body from excreting blood.
And concerning the stricture, it is necessary that he who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible to touch.
And the phlebotomist should anoint his instrument with a little oil beforehand; and he should place his index finger of his left hand over that vein, below the site where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein will move slightly, and the pulsation will cease. For some veins are like fleeing cords when you try to perform phlebotomy on them; they are those full of wind, and when you place your instrument over them, they contract and reveal the phlebotomist; and if the instrument does not open the vein, then it is narrow.
Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist should be careful and attentive to all these things.
And then you release the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is opened only once, then it's good; otherwise, you repeat this action a little lower than that place or on top of it with some urgency, if the place is not swollen.
And if the place is swollen or the patient becomes weak, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the bandage, because strong pulling will bring on more swelling, nor should they bathe.
And then repeat the bloodletting if needed.
And if the opening is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then repeat the bloodletting in that hole according to correctness and narrow it slightly, and do this with some urgency before the place becomes swollen, because many people have a small opening.
But if you see that it is already swollen, then do not repeat [the procedure] on it, for it does not benefit you in any way; and place some oil-soaked linen on it, because it relieves the body of blood. And it is better to use oil in this case than other oils.
And similarly administer an oil-based incision in all cases of phlebotomy, with which we open the veins to prevent blood from flowing out of the body. This is done by applying terebinth, aloes, and sage when one of them is placed on the site, because the blood becomes attenuated and revolved when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as sometimes happens, especially in those who have not been bled frequently, or when the vein is only slightly opened, then you should cut and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the site for about an hour, because it dissolves.
It is necessary to do this near the end of bleeding from that vein or another vein.
And if there remains any blackness or greenness in the area for several days, do not worry; and if you wish, place some dissolved aloes and myrrh on it, or some juice of mint, calamint, or a similar herb.
And many times such abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilica (vein).
And so place your hand on that area, and if you find it soft, then press harder on that area, for this indicates something is wrong; and be careful not to apply too much pressure to that area as it may cause the blood from the artery to flow heavily.
And make an emplaster with water that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then care for it using other treatments until it is healed.
And you should extract blood from each person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color of the blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then let it continue to flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then let it continue to flow until it becomes thinner; and likewise, if it is sharp, continue until the sharpness has passed.
And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and requires a single bloodletting that the phlebotomy of the vein be large and the incision be wide.
And for someone who is weak, do the opposite: let them be bled in many small quantities, and let the incision be narrow.
And the best practice in venipuncture is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of venipuncture is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve injury, and it is considered more commendable and safer than venipuncture according to length and width.
And if syncope is likely to occur during venipuncture, you should administer to the patient beforehand a small piece of bread soaked in mead or simple oxymel; and extract the blood from him in three or four doses.
And if there is coldness of the complexion, then before venipuncture give him bread soaked in honey syrup or spiced honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or very aromatic and fragrant honey syrup.
And if syncope occurs during venipuncture and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then he should drink meat broth and very fragrant honey syrup; and use aromatics with rosewater, and let his feet be anointed with it.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on syncope for evacuation.
Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Here's the translation for your sentence:
"But if one wants to draw blood from the body, in the opposite direction of where it is accumulating, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
"But if there is a lot of blood in the body and it has been cut and causes fever, one must draw out all the blood at once and draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening until syncopation occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while drawing the blood, to prevent him from dying instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
"And it is not necessary, when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, and the orifices of the vein have already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to come out, that you press on it with force and stretch it slightly, because this is very harmful.
"Hold the lance in place until the blood has been evacuated; or use the sharpness of the lancet which has coagulated the blood in the vein's orifices; or place on it some dry theriac, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
And if the vein is infected (or has formed an abscess), then let it be and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them in that spot or in the other arm on another vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cubital or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those (veins).
And the manner of his phlebotomy is that the patient place their hand in hot water until the vein appears clearly.
Then it is tightly bound with a ligature midway up the limb; and then phlebotomized according to the smaller transverse vein, not longitudinally or along the length (of the vein).
And let the incision be wide, and your phlebotomy with it over the joint of the hand slightly.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have achieved your goal.
If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of washing the hands in hot water, and instead the body is bathed in hot water during winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because after it there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the small saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you strengthen the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after having placed it in hot water until the vein is inflated and well visible; then transverse phlebotomy is performed. If you incise it completely, there will be no harm.
And ensure that you do not complete the phlebotomy with your hand, because after it there are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein, and its flow will be hindered.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot easily; similarly, you should do this for any narrow vessel.
However, the advantage of phlebotomy on the left arm is that it is beneficial for conditions related to the spleen.
Do likewise in phlebotomy from this side as you have done on the other.
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for conditions that are located below the torso, such as uterine disorders, menstrual retention, and similar conditions like ulcers and ancient sores on the thighs, and their related ailments.
And the method for this phlebotomy is that the patient puts their foot in warm water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then tie the foot's joint with a ribbon; where the venous ramifications are seen, which are located on the sole of the foot, they branch out into the plantar surface of the foot like twisted roots.
Therefore, phlebotomize the largest vein below the thigh near the heel of the patient, because it is better and safer.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that are beneath the surface of the foot. Perform your phlebotomy with the instrument you use for bloodletting, as if you were slicing through it.
And let the bleeding vessels heal.
But if the flow of blood is not allowed; then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood run until it is drained.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then reapply with the lancet a little further up, because the area is sore; and do not fear the patient's malice, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And likewise, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And as for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, in the hollow of the heel below the wild parsley root.
And the remedy for his bloodletting is to relieve the pain in the hip when it is due to excess blood.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath and wraps and binds his thigh tightly from the waist to the hip over the heel with a long, thin bandage so that it does not appear otherwise.
And therefore, when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that part according to each condition that is possible and according to the transverse vein, which is better; or incise it by incision or dry it by cautery, because the place of it is salty.
And it is very common in many men; and if you find that, and it does not appear throughout the whole [body], then perform phlebotomy on some of its branches, and this is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves; and let the blood flow in the quantity that you want.
Then immediately release the constriction and place over the site of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthen the area, because it heals quickly.
About cupping and the qualities of using those [methods].
Cups are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
Cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this type of cupping that is without scarification is done in two ways, because it is either with fire or without fire.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And ventozation should only extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and in this way it does not catch the virtue through them, as it happens by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for ventozation to be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventozation for illness or for prevention, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at the end, and at any time it may be necessary.
And therefore, when [one] sees any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that cupping be done, as [the cause] has passed for two or three hours.
Furthermore, cupping on the back of the neck is such that when you apply it to the head and it sinks into the hollows; however, it is preferable for this to be an evacuation of the entire body.
And this cupping is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
And it is not advisable to use [cupping] on someone who has a complete cold or who has a cough, because it can cause great harm to them.
And therefore, [cupping] is not suitable for the elderly and those whose heads are affected by cold.
But for those who are undergoing [cupping] continuously on them, forgetfulness is induced; and therefore, it is advisable that you command the cupping practitioner to remove their hand slightly with the cup at intervals, fearing the development of forgetfulness.
But cupping on the back is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic [vein]: and therefore you apply it for asthma, and for constriction of the airways, and for tearing of the respiratory instrument, and for coughing, and for congestion.
And it is necessary that the bladder be emptied a little, because if it is left full, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the bladder of alhagdahan is useful for relieving headaches and for eye diseases, migraines, fever, and toothaches; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the vein.
And it is necessary that you order the cupping practitioner not to press with his hand for scarification, so that he does not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
And cupping on the chin is useful for hoarseness in the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and for similar ailments that are in the mouth, and it is used instead of bloodletting from the vein that is between the two lips.
But cupping that is done on both temples is effective for headaches, which are caused by an excess of heat.
And cupping on both sides within the eyes is equivalent to bloodletting from three veins: the basilica, jugular and cephalic, because it draws blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventouseur not to proceed too much in scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh, and only the nerves and arteries remain there.
And it is a cupping glass with which one is cupped over the haemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcerous wounds below.
And it is necessary to command the cupping glass operator that he use a large glass and that it be of red-hot iron, because the place requires strong suction; and the small and subtle cupping glasses are drawn out and it should be scarified with scarification.
But cupping glasses on the thighs should be applied with greater care, because they draw blood from all over the body, and this helps with old pains in the loins and lower back, bladder, provokes menstruation, helps with melancholy and anxiety; it is also a substitute for venesection of two veins, of the jugular and of two large veins.
However, they greatly weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And the benefit of cupping glasses is similar to the benefit of cupping glasses on two thighs.
And the quality of the positioning of the cupping glasses is that you should place the glass initially empty and suck with moderately warm suction, and do not prolong the position of the glasses, but rather keep them lightly, and leave them constantly, so that the humors come to the place by gradual progression. And do not stop doing this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
And then you make an incision and suck out a little bit at a time, and then consider the condition of the body.
For that person who has soft and delicate flesh with few pores, it is necessary to make an incision only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the person performing the cupping to widen the incision slightly and prune a little bit, and always suck with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because with the first incision the pathway to the subtlety of the blood and its wateriness is opened up. But in the second one, to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made so that it may obtain what is left behind.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one incision is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise with preceding incisions.
And in the process of scarification, which involves reaching the depth of the vein alone.
And if that person's vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentle, opening, and resolving oils; in summer, this can be aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cumin seeds; and in winter, it should be narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or hempseed oil, or those similar to them.
And if the excess is thick and harsh, then let the oil be of amaranth, or balm, or aloe, or aniseed, and similar to them.
But if the person to be cupped has large pores and soft skin, it is necessary that they be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that for them the areas to be cupped be washed before cupping with vinegar water or strong vinegar water, or water of cumin seeds, or water of borage, and similar to those.
And for a person whose blood is of high moisture content, wash the cupping areas with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And for that person whose secretions are abundant, wash their orifices with old wine, or with St. John's wort water, which is marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar herbs.
And it is necessary that the enema be administered before the bath; it is also necessary that it be given immediately after the bath for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep near the enema.
What is necessary is that the patient be bled before receiving an enema.
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who is giving the enema or the one who needs to be bled has hot and inflamed blood because they are choleric and windy, then it is necessary that they take cooling foods, such as sorrel, vinegar, endive, watercress, lettuce, and syrup, and similar things.
And let their food be like this: polenta, and lean bird meat, and foods prepared with vinegar, and similar things.
And for that person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that they drink sweet syrup or syrup of sumac seeds and sumac, and fragrant wine between old and new; and it is necessary to recommend to them that they use little drink and food, and let their foods be polenta, cabbage, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And it is necessary that some men be given in drink at certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, either theriac alpharac or a musk-based medicine, such as musk or nutmeg, so that the main members are comforted and the blood subtilized; and they should not take any other food.
But the bloodlettings that do not involve scarification should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout areas, and on the navel, in the joint areas, and the pudendum of the woman, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And this is not required for anything other than attracting blood from the members, such as placing a bloodletting cup on the breast in an illness of nosebleed; and it is used so that the cold, thick blood of the member may be dissolved, such as when placed on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the member and nourishes it and removes pain by resolving flatulence.
And it is placed on the hemorrhoids when they occur in their swelling or itching, because by virtue of strong attraction, it lifts up the swelling and removes the itch from its place.
"And in a similar way, when there is swelling on the liver and spleen due to wind trapped within them.
"These swellings are treated only with suction, and some times they are treated with fire (or heat).
"And sometimes these treatments are applied full of tepid water to the sicknesses of the spleen.
"And this is because when the swelling is full and large, it should be treated with hot water alone or water in which there are suitable herbs.
"Form of swelling treated with heat: the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have made it; the amount of pus should be half a palm's length; and in the side of it, in the circular part, half of it, the hole should be small according to the amount that can enter into it the tip of a needle.
"It should be made of copper or citron, with thick edges, smooth and polished so that it does not disturb the member due to its position on it.
"And in the middle of it, there should be a crossbar of copper or iron where a candle is placed with fire.
"And this swelling should be much larger than the one we have mentioned; and the smaller ones, according to the sicknesses and the condition of the person using it.
And the bloodletting cups of infants and emaciated individuals are different from those of young adults and robust bodies.
And the method of placing this bloodletting cup with fire on the limb is to extend a cloth with decent wood fire in front of a few candles made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbar in the middle area of the bloodletting cup, so that the fire is lit around the base and does not burn the patient's body.
Then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is placed on the hole as mentioned earlier. When we have the bloodletting cups and do not need to remove the finger, the steam will rise from that hole, and then the cup will soon dissolve.
Then heat the cloth according to its method, and replace it if needed.
However, in the case of a bloodletting cup administered for pleurisy, it is filled with water and does not have a crossbar or hole. It is only placed on the limb when it is full of water.
And this is its shape: The larger this bloodletting cup, the better, as it can hold more water.
Chapter XCVII.
Leeches are not administered to all members but only to those in which it is impossible to position cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the foot and gums, or similar parts; or to members that lack flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similar parts.
And the quality of using those leeches which have been found in clean stagnant waters.
And then they should be placed day and night in stagnant water until they are sluggish, making sure there is no residue in their stomachs. Then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping. And then rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place them on him.
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more helpful.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged after the removal of the leeches and it continues to ooze, then insert a cloth soaked in cold water, and place it over the area until the oozing stops.
Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting, changing them as often as possible.
And if bloodletting is prohibited, then the area should be pricked with fresh blood or insert a needle in the area until blood comes out; and it should be done quickly, because those places that feel any blood will soon heal.
And when you want them to dry, sprinkle a little powdered alum or salt or ashes over them, and they will dry quickly.
This is the beginning of the treatise on restoration, the third part. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and common people who at any time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it has happened that this method of the scholars in our land is neglected; and I have not forgotten it at any time throughout everything; and I have not added anything to what follows, except by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study upon their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
And then I directed my attention towards experiments and studies throughout the course of my life.
And I have already described all that is contained in my knowledge and on which my experiment has passed in this chapter; since I have shortened it for you others and delivered you from the occupation of length; and I have shortened it to the end of abbreviation; and shown it to the end of explanation; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and compilation concerning the fracture of bones, from which a necessary preamble is required before we begin to recall the broken limbs and their various types. Therefore, we should say in the preamble of this chapter the summations of the discourse; and the chapters to which at the beginning are necessary the artists and fixed on the truth of those; so it is with you and those who are apt that know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when any fracture, dislocation, torsion or fall occurs, it is necessary for you to begin with phlebotomy or purging, or both at the same time, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness of power, or if the affected person is a child, or an old man in decline, or if it is a time of very hot weather, or very cold.
And soon he should be satisfied with food consisting of fresh herbs, and of bird meat and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain that the abscess has been cauterized, and if you do not fear an outpouring of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to their previous diet with which they are accustomed.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient should be fed with nutritious foods of rich and thick nourishment, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, cabbage, onions, cow stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, fatty meats similar to these, and with this diet a lighter and better coagulation of the fracture is achieved.
And know that broken bones in people who are very old or feeble cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food intake, especially foods that are heavy, viscous, and dense, as we have mentioned.
And know that the types of fractures vary according to the different parts of the body, because a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the skull; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the hand; and similarly, all other parts of the body differ from one another.
And I will recall every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from others.
Also, the types of fractures vary within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are also differentiated within themselves; for there is a curved fracture when stars occur in it; and sometimes a fracture occurs according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the patella, shinbone, and metatarsals, both with and without protrusion, as happens on the skin when preparing to write. It is also a fracture with an open wound and disruption in the skull, and it is a small fissure.
And in all kinds of things, it is necessary or painful to remember the restoration of him, according to what will come as a distinct memory in its places.
Signal of bone fracture. And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: there is a twisting of it, and an elevation or prominence felt upon touching it, and also when you press it with your hand.
Therefore, when there is neither apparent twisting in the place nor a distinct sensation upon your touch, and when you move the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it may be a slight twist or a small crack, so you should not move it with your hand and compress it completely; rather, place upon it of the medicines that come to mind at that moment which are appropriate for the place; and then bind tightly with fine bandages.
And know that when the place is bent and not cut into two or something else does not happen in it suddenly, as it is raised entirely from its position, then you must begin immediately to straighten it, having put on it something that causes heat cautiously.
"And if an abscess occurs on the patient, leave it alone for some days until the abscess stops; then treat it with as much lightness and skill as you can.
"And know that the restorative treatment and cauterization of [the patient] is lighter than for the bone in which the abscess occurs.
"And then strengthen [the patient] according to how their recovery will proceed.
"But if the abscess is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; either with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and the hand.
"And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural shape, while the broken parts of the limb are extended; then make sure to return these additions with skill and in any way possible.
"And be careful, according to your strength, that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and make sure, according to your ability, that you apply one bone to its companion in the best manner.
"And it is fitting that at that time you should touch the bone with your hand, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and treat it according to the extent of your skill.
Based on the given text and the pattern of translation provided, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
And the quality of the constriction on the calm member is what I recommend; know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in their forms.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe and their likes, in such cases it is necessary for the covering to be of fine cloth.
But those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, in these cases it is necessary for the covering to be thick and hard, because a thick cover binds the large member strongly on all sides with equal constriction, so that in it no bruise can enter.
And then begin, immediately after your evacuation of excrement, to apply plasters appropriately for this purpose, over the location of the fracture with three or four bandages depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the plaster.
And then come to it from the highest point of the location of the fracture, and tighten more so that your stricture does not become loose with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And then extend yourself with a bandage over the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the stricture until you have taken from the location a large portion.
And then take another bandage and wrap it over the broken place with a bandage, and then come to the bandages from the lowest part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the strictness of the bandage and in its loosening according to what we have said above in the first bandage.
And then place between the bandages of linen or cloth with which is covered the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then cover these bandages with well-made steel bandages immediately, if there is no swelling or abscess in the place, and then place on it that which dries up the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it for some days; and then strengthen over it with the steel bandages.
And let the steps of the patient's bed be made of hollow canes, or well-formed reeds; or they may be of pine wood; or of palm ribs. And let each step be wide according to this form and this figure:
However, it is necessary that the step placed on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other steps. The length of the step should correspond to the size of the limb in terms of both largeness and smallness. Then strengthen the steps with another bandage according to your first binding. And then bind it decently on top, as we have said about binding, and let the binding be tighter nearer to the fracture, and the further it is from the fracture, the less tight the binding should be.
It is necessary that the threads be average in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people placing their threads of twisted hemp cord, it is a great mistake, because when the binding would need to be equal.
And likewise, thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve with them what you want by binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between step and step.
And if the patient is affected by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those places, then place beneath them a piece of wool or fleece until it causes no harm.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a bruise, and there is a disruption in the spine, and I will remember this in the following chapter according to its specific nature.
And know that no completely broken limb is tight with stars on the first day; the reason for this is because the limb, when it is large, should not be pressed upon with stars except after about five days or seven, or more, according to your caution of an impending abscess.
And this is the manner of plasters with which the ancients restored, which are placed upon fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manner of plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many conditions and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and it is that you take the powder from the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour that falls in the sides of the mill.
And make it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and place the composition of it not too thick nor too thin; and then use this.
This sentence describes another method for creating an emollient that can treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Here's the translation:
This sentence describes another method for creating a plaster to treat fractures and dislocations:
All should be crushed in a mortar with much caution, and they should be sifted, and they should be mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Method for plastering joints and dislocated bones that cause pain in those areas, as well as cracks and fractures: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and melted fat, then place it on the affected area.
However, this plaster has no restorative power, but rather restrains pus and alleviates pain specifically.
Another method for a plaster that heals broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method for a brief plaster applied for the healing of bone fractures and to promote the resolution of remaining pus: take equal parts of mallow root, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and oats; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the member is not open.
But if it is open, then mix it with wet coriander water or with water and use it.
This text appears to be discussing a different method for creating a poultice with a stronger resolution than the previous one, specifically when dealing with a hard abscess that requires the restoration of a limb. Here is a line-by-line translation:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
In Spain, it has been seen that they place [something] on the broken member before its restoration and the causes in which there is a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, wax and similar substances to those causes that we have recommended.
A way to make a plaster for wounds and pain: take equal parts of cumin, hazelnut shells or feathers from a bird, althea, and salt; crush them together, sieve them, and mix well to make a plaster.
However, the duration for which the plaster should remain in place depends on whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is broken and out of place; in such cases, you should not remove it for many days. And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should cut it open or remove it immediately, and take off the plaster from it.
And take a linen cloth and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and with it wash the area until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure that the abscess has formed, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and that the pain has been alleviated.
And then carefully apply that fine and small plaster, do not tighten it with your first constriction, but use the same one that was used for healing.
And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and all the inflammations have already been removed from everything, and you need bandages and constrictions, then apply them in the same way as you did at the beginning.
And if nothing happens to the limb from any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove it before three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days according to what you see in the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.
Then tighten the constriction more than your first constriction, and adjust it according to the patient's growing condition, as their health progresses.
But if you see that the fracture site has dried and become thinner than necessary, know that nutrition is not reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with lukewarm water each time you release it; and this should be done for three days; slightly loosen the constriction, and through this procedure, nourishment will flow to the limb, and it will heal slightly.
Sure, here's the translation of the sentence:
Here is a translation of the given sentence into English:
"Chapter two: On fractures that occur in the head.
"There are many types of fractures, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by a blow from a stick, and the blow passes through all the bone, which is left behind as it exits, just like this happens in wood. And because of this, this type is called splintering; or the stick cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh but does not pass through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
"And the wound from these two types of fractures is either large or small, and it is a crushing or splintering injury; and the cause is a blow with powder or falling onto stone, and they resemble each other.
"And this type of fracture can be penetrating, which affects the skin and tissue beneath the bone, or it can occur on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
"And another type of fracture is one that occurs within the bone, in its finer structure, and because of this, this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
Here's the translation of your source sentence:
And this is particularly done in the bodies of young children, such as infants' heads.
And for all these types of broken bones, they are treated with weights like little stars scattered. And I will come with a reminder about all this in its place.
And recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them, and by inquiry with tests and removal of corrupt flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary type is recognized because it is exposed on the bone and it is scrubbed and anointed with oil, for the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the patient's accidents, and if you see through the accidents that it indicates clearly by manifestation of fear, such as vomiting of bile, distension, loss of consciousness, voice loss, fainting, acute fever, issuance of the humors and heat of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed.  (Accidents here refers to symptoms or signs of illness)
And if you see non-serious accidents, then hope for health, and thus begin his treatment.
The text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving the treatment of joint pain, particularly gout. Let's break down and translate the provided sentence into English:
And if it is during the summer days, then it is necessary to cut open the bone in front of the seventh day, ensuring that what is under the bone does not become corrupt due to the skin, and so that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the brain, and it is with small parts and fragments, then it is necessary to cut open the comminuted and fragmented part, as I will advise you.
And it is that you shave the head of the sick person, and cut open over the bone according to custom and method as possible for you according to the shape of the wound, and that it be light on the sick person.
And if it happens to you that there is detection of bone, flow of blood or hot pus, then you should apply to it what is necessary, and that is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides, and you are sure about the flow of the blood; and then begin on the sawing of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And the first method is that you cut the bone with a narrow scissors like this, and this is its shape: And then apply another scissor of this kind, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its shape:
And then administer more of the second ointment than the first.
And it is appropriate to have a diverse number of ointments, some of which are thicker than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the end of their sharpness, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them easily with a hammer on the ointments, so that you do not hit the head and injure the patient.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is appropriate to drill a hole in its circumference before you administer the ointments with the trepan, which are called non-penetrating trepans.
And they are not called this way only because they do not reach the end of the bone to that point which is close to it; rather because the trepan has a round tip or edge on that part where its sharp end is, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take many of these trepans, each one suitable for the thickness of every bone, until there is in all the bones of the skull an end that is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of the thickness of this bone.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence:
And it is important that you watch with all caution that the incision does not touch any cause of infection.
And then when you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if the abscess is attached to it, you must extract it. It is important that you scrape and clean the rough part of the bone with another instrument similar to a knife, but more delicate and sharper than other knives.
And if there remain any small or splintered parts of the bone, then take those out with ease using the tools that you have; and then cure the wound with linens and ointments as we have said before.
And another method of operation is light and far from fear, which Guallia teaches and praises greatly; and his words are as follows: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most intense and obvious. When you have uncovered that part and placed under it the tip of this sharp and joyful knife, whose form is as follows:
And the lenticular part is sharp and does not cut anything, and the pointed part is from it two finger widths long, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits to the abscess with its sharp edge facing into the bone.
And then strike the protruding part of a fracture with a small hammer until the bone is completely splintered, and be sure that the skin does not suffer any accident that you fear in any way. And if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of his craft; certainly, even if he were asleep.
Then if there is any cause that breaks the skin near the bone in some places of the bone, remove it from him with the pointed end of a lancet, and extract it from him with ease, for it is removed from him without injury and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is broken or separated from the bone remains on its surface with roughness and subtle thorns, then it is necessary to shave away that roughness and eliminate those thorns with sharp razors, prepared in diverse quantities so that you can use them appropriately and correctly according to what you perceive in your operation of that broken bone and its shape.
It is necessary that you use the largest razor to shave the bone at first, and then use increasingly finer ones until you reach the finest and sharpest of all.
In any of the other small or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have lost in its correction.
And it is because not everything is agreed upon among all those who have studied this art. And we shall discuss what we have written about large fractures.
And if the fat is torn when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the size of the wound and dip it in warmed oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and dip it in wine and warmed oil and place it on the first cloth, and apply as little pressure as possible so that you do not crush the flesh; and then administer linen bandages, but not too tightly, only to the extent of the wound.
And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess has passed; and then remove it and administer medicines which have a drying effect, such as linseed oil and powdered iris root, and pepper and Aristolochia, and similar things.
Based on the provided text and the pattern of translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And be mindful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and do not allow it to be covered with an ointment or anything else; nor let you increase virulence in it; for when it is confined under the brain's membrane, it corrupts it and will rot it, and thus upon the patient comes this malignant evil.
And it happens in the vault of the head, especially when the bone is hollowed out and the care is neglected, and there is darkness on its surface; therefore, if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is pernicious without any doubt.
And if darkness occurs not from the disease but from the medicine applied on it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing that darkness, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and then place it on the vault; and then treat it with the appropriate healing spices until it heals.
Chapter III
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for two superior parts together or one of them alone, because in it there are two bones; the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and nothing happens to it except bruising and crookedness and narrowing.
Here's the translation of the given sentence: And let this be done by you for ease, and ensure that nothing falls on the patient due to your operation.
And if the break is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then it should be equalized with the end of a reed, on which there is a small thickness.
And if the break is in two parts, then you do likewise.
And try to restore the patient on the first day of the break, if possible; and if not, then you must wait seven or ten days before cauterizing the abscess.
And then insert a wick of linen cloth into the tip of the nose, if the break is in one part; or put two swabs, if the break is in two parts, and it should be thick enough to fill the hole in the nose.
However, some of the old restorers say that the swabs should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; it is better that the wick be soaked in an egg-white plaster mixed with powdered chalk; and then leave the swab until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it may be necessary to intervene in the nose, in the event of a broken nose, wrapping it in lion cloth, and if the patient has suffered a severe fracture and is not forbidden from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary to you; do it if you wish, or leave it alone if you wish.
And if there is another case of an abscess on the nose, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if there is no abscess on the nose, then it is necessary to apply a plaster to that area from outside with sesame flour and finely ground beans mixed with egg white; and then place a lion cloth over it, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, it is necessary to cut into those [fractures], and remove them with appropriate instruments; then close the incision, and treat it with something that heals and solidifies, and with plasters suitable for this purpose.
And if there is a wound inside the nose, it is necessary to treat that with cautery and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and there is no open wound, observe whether the break is only on the outside and not split into two parts inside, then its treatment is easy.
Therefore, if the break is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth, and similarly if the break is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that push the swelling of the fracture inside towards the outside parts with ease, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; thus you straighten it.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer a traction of both parts according to their proper alignment until the union is possible.
And if there is a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those which you expect to remain in place with a thread of gold or silver or linen; and then place wax on the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth on it, and place a large star-shaped dressing decently made, or a sole of felt equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie it above according to how you are familiar with tying it and as is suitable for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and withhold their food from them sparingly.
And if you believe that the appearance has already been changed in some way, then you take it off on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered from him and plaster it with powder of mallow, or with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the bandage from him, and place a piece of wool over the plaster.  />
Then when this plaster is attached and adjusted to him, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it there without removing it until he is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is healed in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for his treatment until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or splinters; then you should carefully remove those splinters using an instrument suitable for removing such instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a fleam (a type of surgical instrument) according to the amount of your need.
And when you have removed those stitches and nothing is taken out, then if the opening of the wound is wide, you should close it; but if not, place on it one of the suitable plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and let it heal.
Chapter 5
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken from the front part due to a muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is broken, or separated, or divided into two parts without stitches; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens that stitches occur in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the broken clavicle and follows it, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
And then bandage the fracture with your own clothes until its form is set as needed, ensuring there is neither a protuberance nor a concavity.
And if you need more extension, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's head, and let its size be according to your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and compress the roll with your hand until you bandage the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the sides, because it has reached the breast, then have the patient lie on their back with a pillow placed under the shoulder muscles.
And the assistant should press on the patient's shoulder muscles towards the sides until the collarbone bone is raised and is in the correct position on top of the chest, and then you should straighten the fracture and bandage it with your clothes.
But if you feel the ends of the collarbone and they are sharp, then it is necessary to cut into it and extract those sharp ends with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should contrive an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, having placed under the collarbone the instrument that serves to extract; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
It seems like the text is describing a procedure involving a cup or vessel of some sort. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Sure, here is the translation of your provided text:
And if the wound that you have cut when extracting the thorn from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you should close the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the wound is small or you fear an abscess forming, then fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the wound's cut.
And if an abscess forms, then infuse a cloth in vinegar, rose oil, and wine, and place it on the area.
And be careful not to move the splint over the broken bone; therefore, it is necessary that you check on the patient every day, and when the bandage softens or the splint seems to have moved, then you should adjust this and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the patient's head on their neck, and place under their pillow a small cushion during the night, so that with this, the adjutor muscles of the same side are raised, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated by the muscle; or the arm of the patient is tied to the neck.
And do not untie the bandage unless there is swelling or pus in the area within twelve days.
And then renew the poultice if you see the face turning blue, and adjust in the stricture and restore it, leaving it until the fracture of the clavicle is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The text you provided is a blend of languages, seemingly drawing from medieval Latin and Romance languages like Spanish, Italian, or French. Let's break down the sentence line by line:
And so when the place in him is broken — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture forcefully prepare him and reduce that shape according to the natural form in all manner of cleverness that is possible for you.
And then place on the wound powder of ground meal mixed with egg white and stop the bleeding; and then place a double layer of cloth powder; and then place on him a thin board as wide as the entire spatula or even a little wider.
But if the board is concave in any of the places on the spatula, then fill that concavity with something to stop the bleeding and then raise the board until it is level.
And then strengthen on top with a long bandage, tied tightly and securely, so that the board is not moved from its place.
And check the bandage every day; and whenever it is found to be softened, bandage again and strengthen and equalize the board if it has moved from its place.
And tell the patient to lie on his back.
And the splint will be removed after 20 days or 25.
And so when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and know for certain that it belongs to those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone and put a cord underneath it, then you cut above it, remove it, and act according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula of Sadacio in case of an abscess here.
Chapter VII.
About the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and that takes a long time to heal, but the ends of it move quickly since they are cut and crushed.
And of its accidents, when the middle is broken, it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever and vomiting blood; and the cavity in the broken bone is evident and not hidden from feeling.
And its restoration is such that the patient is laid on their back and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; then press on their muscles and adjust their ribs with both hands, and be subtle in the operation of it and in the positioning according to every possible and suitable manner until the shape of the bone returns as required.
Here's my attempt at translating the given text line by line:
Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
This appears to be the title of a chapter in the medieval medical treatise. It translates to "Chapter VIII.
Regarding the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in large areas near the back; and in their end parts from the front, this does not occur unless it is due to the fact that they are cartilaginous. And understanding of it is not hidden from feeling, therefore you should know about it with these words.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that you reduce the fracture with words according to the possible method, until it is reduced as necessary, and then apply and strengthen the broken bones with a bandage, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inner parts, then severe pain and puncture occur in the patient, similar to the puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and this happens because the bones pierce the membrane; and it causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And already the ancients were clever about that with very clever words.
And of them is what they said: it is necessary to place food before the patient that causes inflation and flatulence, so that the stomach is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence:
And some of them say that it should be placed on the bladder and that one should suck with strength; this seems reasonable, but there is a fear that the bladder might draw the excess to the area due to its weakness.
And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is full, making sure the wrapping is tight around the body; then the patient should be treated with a poultice of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe pain that they cannot tolerate, and the bones press against the membrane with a pointed object, it is feared for the patient's life; therefore, cut into the area, reveal the fractured rib, then place an instrument on top of it that preserves the airway—the tool mentioned earlier—and gently separate the bones and remove it.
And then we should join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then cut open and press poultices soaked in hot oil onto the area, and treat the patient with water that is suitable for the internal abscess.
"And let him be laid on his back on the bed he sleeps in until he is cured.
"Chapter IX
"On the restoration of a broken spine in the back and neck.
"Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, followed by their reduction, and likewise with the vertebrae of the back. "And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider: if you see their hands are softened, numbed, dead, and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those, and when you press those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then you should know that he will not be cured, and in such a state it is fatal.
"And if he moves those and feels constriction with your fingers or pricking, then you should know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will be cured with care.
"And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and you want to know if he will be cured or not, then consider his feet.
"Then if you see that they are also softened, it happens to those what happened to the hands, and soon when lying on his back, he has venting and discharge without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and therefore do not trouble with his care.
But if none of those causes are present, the cause is better and easier.
And the treatment for this is that you pierce towards the pus of the abscess cautiously and place over the dry spine oil, alone or with drops of honey; place it on that area some times a day until the abscess is drained.
And then place one of the comforting and strengthening plasters, and bind it firmly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the painful side until healed.
And if there is attrition of the bone or any other cause that has been separated from it, then you should cauterize on the tendon and cut that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment until healed.
But if the back of the bone is broken and it is the end of the spine, then you should insert the middle finger of your left hand into the rectum, and straighten the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible according to its size; and then place a plaster and splint on it, if necessary, and then strengthen it.
And if you feel broken bones in him, then place a splint on it, remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the healing of the anus.
The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only in the extremities of these [bones] and they are extended in length and decline towards the inside; and it happens that the patient feels pain in the area and punctuation, and the leg becomes numb when it is broken.
And the restoration of it [the ankle] is that you place your hand over it until it is in the shape of the fracture.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it [the bone], then you should enclose it according to what seems appropriate to you by equality, enclosing it until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the inside, then you should have the patient lie on their back until you are prepared to restore that fracture. And then when you have enclosed it [the fracture], place a plaster on top of it, and also place a wooden or leather splint on it, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear a puncture of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
The text you provided appears to be in a language influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, which suggests it could be in Old Occitan or another medieval Romance language. Let's break down the sentence and attempt a translation:
"But if you encounter an abscess (apostema), then you must stop the stretching and restoration until the abscess subsides. Place something over it that promotes healing, as previously mentioned; then return to restoring him, and strengthen him accordingly.
"And if such a condition occurs in the ribs or they are broken, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI
Of the restoration of the fractured elbow.
"The elbow is that which is between the humerus and the head of the shoulder.
"And if it is broken, then its restoration can be done in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a flat piece of wood, medium in size, like this:
"And let there be two laces attached at both ends, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
"And let the patient sit on a stool; and then he should throw out his broken arm over the wooden piece until it reaches the middle of the curve of the wood.
"And then it should be suspended with some heavy weight, or the servant should extend it to both sides; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with his hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
The sentence you've provided is written in Occitan, a Romance language from the medieval period. Here's the translation of each line into English:
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen on the fracture with one band and on that with another band, and each of the two assistants should extend to both its parts.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then half of the band should be placed above the patella and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is appropriate to place the band over that location and over that elbow.
Seal it with ease and without labor, and as soon as it is sealed according to what is appropriate and applied by good application, then strengthen that if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs, then leave the stricture for seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen that.
And the manner of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrap of new linen cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over the patient's muscle.
"And place a cloth and strengthen over the helper's arms so that the arm is in a stable position, unless you are advised against this due to a broken bone.
"Then use splints.
"And it is that you place over the fracture a splint which is wider and stronger than other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on each side.
"Then strengthen over the splints with the bandage that has been mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
"And it is that your bandage on the site of the fracture should be tighter. "And when the fracture is longer, the bandage should be less tight.
"And so if you see the arrangement of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the limb to its place, then do it.
"And if you fear pus formation, then leave the bandage and the splints in place for seven days as we have said.
"And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that swelling or inflammation does not occur on the site; or it is prohibited that food reaches the limb due to excessive tightness of the bandage; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will cause this condition, then do not remove the bandage until approximately three days or more have passed.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, with their hands placed on their stomach.
And place on the helper a cushion filled with wool equally, and always consider during the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not displaced or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, so correct this immediately with your skill.
And give the patient's food according to the order we mentioned earlier, so that the food is soft at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food thicker for them.
For it is customary for the helper and the leg to be strengthened in forty days; then it is necessary for them to be released and a bath should be administered, and the area should be treated with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is close to the joint, then do not remove the ligament and splints from it for one day or up to two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of a broken arm.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And if only the large or small vein is broken and both are pierced together quickly.
When the small vein is cut above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when it is broken below the breakage of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small vein above, it is suitable for the doctor to make a small extension with ease before it becomes swollen.
But if the large vein is what is pierced, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
And if both veins are pierced together, then you must make the extraction much stronger.
It is necessary that you place the hand for its restoration and that the extension of it be spread over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be above the parts, more than all the others, and let the auricular one be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
And there should be a cushion in front of him at his height or rightness, so that the patient does not struggle.
And another minister extends his arm from the side, placing it below or with a bandage, and another minister does the same above.
And then the doctor envelops the bone until it is reduced to its best shape possible.
And if there are splinters in the bone, then you must remove all of them from their place with your skill.
And if there appears in him a splinter that touches the cord and you do not hope for his recovery, then make an incision over it and remove it according to the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for that, so take care of it accordingly.
And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your reduction, then you should line a cloth with oiled and white wax cerate, which is mild between sharpness and subtleness, and strongly wrap it around that with fine stricture until the abscess has subsided; then remove the cerote and place a prepared plaster made of ground wheat flour and egg white on it; and afterwards place lead plates over it. And let the plate which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the name of the stars in the arm is found in the major dispositions, whether it's a fracture in one finger or in two fingers together.
Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when you see the swelling spreading to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts, apply the bandage a little moister according to what is remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the thread used to secure it should be of medium thickness, between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And observe the limb and the bandage over the next few days. And if any cause occurs which requires correction, as soon as it happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until that swelling subsides.
And let the limb rest without constraint until it is at peace, and then return to bandaging.
And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has been moved and appears to be in place, then correct everything with your skill.
"And consider whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of constriction, for then it is necessary to soften it slightly and allow it to rest for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
"But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to free him until about twenty days or around that time.
"And also the patient's hand should be suspended to prevent involuntary movements, and make him sleep on his back.
"And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or rather lightly in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the condition and the natural disposition.
"Chapter XIII.
"On the restoration of a finger or toe fracture.
"Know that in the fingers and toes of the hands and feet, only slight bruising occurs when they are injured, and not fracture.
"And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruising, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and in front of him place two hundred weights equally, and also place the hand over that which is extended.
And immediately the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should join them together until they are properly united with a good union.
And then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, lest an abscess occur; and immediately place a plate on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the interior parts, you should take the palm of the hand, and then make it resemble a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze it with their broken hand; immediately it should be tightly bound with long cloth.
And there should be a heart of wax wrapped in cloth on which the hand is placed, so that the wax is applied to the palm; and squeeze it as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the exterior parts, then it is necessary to place a plate on top and another plate beneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and immediately bind the bandage as the hand is wrapped around the rods with linen cloths.
And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, it should be joined as necessary and immediately bound to the palm. If you wish, place a small straight plate on it so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
Certainly! Here’s the translation of the given sentence:
And consider, in your treatment and approach, the disposition of the abscess cautiously and carefully—with your operation—in such a way that it is necessary when some cause of those occurs, according to how the story is told about it.
Chapter XIV
Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when strongly hit, is broken and becomes evident by sensation as it moves to the front part and the uppermost part.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture, and the patient should be placed on their stomach and face down.
And then the minister should extend all the ligaments to their full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is towards the head of the thigh, then let the ligament be close to the knee towards the patella, so that the extension reaches there, and the other ligament should be under the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is towards the knee, then the ligament should be made close to the knee, and the extension should be towards the lower parts.
And then the physician should join the bones with both hands until they are reduced to their natural shape and the bone is firmly united; at that time, it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage, lest an abscess occur in the member. But if an abscess occurs in the patient, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be made as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the break on the lower side, so that the ends of the thread come out from the higher part of both sides; then turn around the leg and the thigh what remains of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the location of that fracture splints, and place one of those splints on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage may be held firm.
The text appears to be discussing a method for treating a bone fracture using bandages or bindings. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And then extend both ends of the thread through the openings until they reach the toe, and tighten both ends of the needles on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not slip from its place.
And then leave the structure in place so that no corrosion, apostema, or swelling occurs on the limb; if any of these happen, then consider removing it from him, and correct what happens immediately, as we have said many times.
But if the bone is broken where the lesion is located, then you must splint it as best as you can; if not, wrap it and keep it immobile, and treat it with the remedy mentioned previously until it heals.
And sometimes this bone fracture is strengthened by adjusting needles to it, as we have said in the adjutory and in the arm.
But however, in the restoration of it done in this manner, no limping occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or something else is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he who was always lame limp.
"And know that the cushion should be held in place for forty days or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the diversity of conditions and other dispositions.
"Chapter XV.
"On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
"Know that a fracture of the knee joint occurs late, but it happens to some people more frequently.
"But if it happens to someone, then it is only a crack or hole in its parts, and this is with or without pain, and all of this depends on the feeling.
"And its restoration is such that the broken parts are made equal with the aforementioned methods, until it is joined and united as much as possible by equality, facility, and craftsmanship.
"Then place a plaster and press it onto that round part, if needed; and hold it tightly in place with a suitable bandage.
"Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as poultices and similar things, to guard against any accident and what is suitable for it until it is healed.
The translation for "Capitol .xvi." is "Chapter XVI.
"On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
"Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is named after the thigh itself; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
"And it happens to each of the types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, and restoration is made in this way as with the arm equally, and its operation is one.
"And if two bones are broken together, the thigh becomes completely shattered.
"And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh becomes shattered in front.
"And if the larger bone is broken, it falls backward, and this is one of those cases that you should not attempt.
"Then administer extension, straightening, and binding of the splints according to the same method.
"However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture is jagged with many splinters, the extension should be less and lighter, and ease it with your skill.
"And in the thigh there is one operation similar to that of the arm, which is when you have joined the splints and completed the entire procedure, then you will take wooden pegs, which are placed beneath the splints that are placed on the sole, and these are made exactly like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not very thick, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and drive it in from the top to the bottom.
And then wrap around each leg in two layers of cloth according to its length, place one layer over the top of one thigh and the other over the opposite side, ensuring that they reach down to the lowest part of the foot.
And then bind the two thighs in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this binding the thigh is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains stable.
And a splint of wood is administered according to the length of the thigh; and it is placed on the leg to prevent it from moving.
And it is most important that you do this in cases of fracture, for with such injury it is called precisely.
And then consider the thigh every day and study it for any changes, and guard against abscesses or swelling or other similar causes; and if you notice any such cause, then apply to it what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not always fracture completely; but the bones of the foot sometimes do fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they do not experience anything except attrition in their position.
And if the bones of the foot seem to have a fracture and you see these bones raised above themselves among each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
Then place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and then step on them, press down, and grind them until they return to their places.
Then place a plaster and wool above it, and underneath the foot's sole, put a small board with two flat surfaces.
Then strengthen it with the foot using a straight bandage, after you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials needed for the treatment.
And after three or four days have passed, then you shall unbind the bandage, for you will find that the bones have been ground down or perhaps they are displaced or dislocated, and the operation on them is as you know.
But if some bones are displaced, then restore those and grind them as I have instructed you in the restoration of the hand's fingers. Then place a splint on the displaced finger according to its length and slightly wider than it; then under the foot place this board that I have recommended to you, and strengthen it with a proper bandage.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
And it is appropriate for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that were mentioned to you in other treatises on accidents that we have discussed; and apply yourself to every accident with what is needed.
### Chapter XVIII
### On the Fracture of a Woman's Pelvis, the Penis Bone, and the Man's Shaft
When the woman's pelvis is fractured, then have her sit in a squatting position, and afterwards incline her slightly to one side, and hold her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in the woman's pelvis as described; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be raised little by little, because all this is forgotten until the fractured bone returns to its original position in front of the pelvis as described.
Then place cushions on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and then urinate, and replace and return it as you did at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
And do this for seven days or about that time, because by then it will be healed.
Sure, here's the translation of your provided sentence:
And it should be filled with cotton and left in place for some days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of a man's or woman's finger are broken, then administer in their restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and seldom happens, especially to one who has some education and knows how to use and understand this book of mine; for that fracture indicates to you the best position for correct restoration and fixation, so pay close attention.
But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take an egg white and put the penis into it; then place a cloth wrapping over it and let it be wrapped up, and then let it rest for three days or around that time, until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
On the restoration of bones when there is an injury.
It is advisable for someone who has suffered a fracture with an injury, especially if the bone is large, such as the hip bone or thigh bone, or similar to that, that you bleed them and perform phlebotomy on them immediately if the conditions for phlebotomy are favorable to you, as we have said above.  (Note: "fleubotomia" is an old term for bloodletting)
And if the wound is bleeding, then you should hold pressure on it so that you can sprinkle powdered dry eggshells on it, unless there is another reason present.
And then begin to restore the broken bone on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess forms, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes over the skin and is exposed, then it is necessary to pierce it with a needle and level it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
But if the extension is not suitable and the balance of it with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and it is an instrument that is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these, as many as are needed for all kinds of fractures in every way.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the context and the similarities with modern Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
And this is how it is done:
And its name in Greek is "labret willingly help," which means a small shovel.
Because the end of it must be placed at an angle, raised over the protruding part of the bone.
And you should strike it once until the bone returns to its original position and is covered with some kind of poultice.
And so you should cover the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, then it is necessary for you to insert the end of that bone until the instrument has enough power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then insert it with whatever is suitable among the instruments that we have mentioned; or saw it off with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
Then scrape away what remains on the bone, the roughness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reduced, and if after the reduction the patient feels intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you can to bring great relief to the patient.
When your treatment of the bone is complete, and at this point submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not apply wax or any other substance containing oil to the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation or corruption in him.
And at this time administer steel to the patient when you finish the bone treatment, and leave the wound uncovered so that flies can lay eggs, then use tweezers to remove the maggots and apply dressings according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for it is said that many foolhardy doctors have done this and caused death or severe injury to their patients, which is unhealthy. And if the wound has a slight swelling, soften it, unlike the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that the aforementioned bad accidents might occur, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply steel to it, but rather make a dressing of hard cloth instead of steel and stretch it with them.
And when after one day or two the wound begins to heal, which in him has generated a bruise, then you remove from him the cloth that you had placed over him with honey, and then apply calves, ointments with which according to our custom we treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to unbind the bandage and examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the sore runs out of him towards the parts below with ease.
If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor removed from him, then know that here are the effects of smallpox, so you should still examine the wound with a probe. And from those effects, those that are separated, remove and extract them; those that are not separated and cause pain to the limb and make it swell, incise them as much as is possible for you.
And if pus or fluid exudes from the wound, indicating suppuration or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should place one of those (remedies) on it which is suitable for him according to the treatment whose narrative has been told in its chapter.
Here's my attempt at translating this sentence:
"Capitol .xx." translates to "Chapter XX.
"De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura." translates to:
Sure, I'll attempt to translate the given medieval medical text into modern English:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Based on the provided text and pattern, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Chapter 21
On the restoration of fractures, when it is restored and then the member remains subtle and brittle, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the member remains subtle and brittle, it happens not without reason: one of these reasons is an excess of dissolution of the ligaments and their binding, which was not done as needed; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or due to superfluous tightening; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
The cure for this is to give the patient food and make their heart tender until the blood is replenished in them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness over them.
And then place a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws the necessary nourishment to it, or continue the moistening of it with warm water until the nourishment runs and the member returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
On the treatment of gnawed bones, when they are restored crookedly and you prevent the operation from doing what is needed.
When the limb that has already been restored approaches its healing process due to tortuosity and prominence of the bone, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb is distorted, nevertheless the limb is not prevented from performing its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who claims that the limb has been newly set.
However, there have been foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if lameness and nodosity are recent, then they should be soaked in tepid water, into which have been cut mollifying herbs such as leaves of mallow and roots of mullein, and melilot, and similar to those; and let a poultice with mollifying properties be made for him, such as well-made diachylon; or take the powder of mullein root and mix it with egg white or oil of sweet almonds, and make a poultice with that; or take fat figs and mash them with pigeon dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are called ammans consolidacium.
E algunas veces se disuelve con un frotamiento suave y constante, realizado con las manos húmedas, y se debe mover el miembro en todas direcciones durante todo el tiempo.
Más si la tortuosidad ya ha avanzado y se ha vuelto fuerte y convertido en piedra, y se requiere un tratamiento con hierro, entonces es necesario que el pus sea evacuado y que la continuidad del hueso sea disuelta. Se debe cortar lo que sobra del nudo de ese miembro con tijeras finas, y se debe administrar facilidad en esa parte con solicitud y estudio.
Capítulo XXIII.
Sobre el desplazamiento (dislocación).
La dislocación es el desplazamiento de alguna de las articulaciones de su lugar, lo que impide el movimiento, distorsiona la forma del miembro y causa dolor y grandes daños al paciente.
Por lo tanto, cuando ocurre una dislocación, es necesario actuar rápidamente para reducirla y no demorar en hacerlo. Si se tarda, el lugar se llena de pus y es muy difícil realizar la reducción de la dislocación.
And for this reason, it is not necessary for the patient to be moved or stretched during the time of sleep, because many times it brings on spasms and toothaches.
But when this happens, you should go to the patient's bedroom, and immediately lay them down on their back so that they can rest; then wrap the affected member in warm water and oil, and gently reduce it.
And let every member be treated with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as follows, after fracture; from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Chapter 24
Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both jaws can be dislocated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a small distance and softened somewhat, or they are completely dislocated so that they are softened at the joint until the patient drools saliva and cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its own flesh.
When the dislocation is minor, it usually returns to its original position on its own with little effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and fully realized, then it is necessary to apply a slight reduction to it promptly, without delaying at all.
And the attendant should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts his thumb of one hand into the mouth of the patient, placing it on the dislocated condyle of the jaw if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides. The doctor should then grasp the patient's chin with his other hand and command the patient to relax their jaw muscles and allow them to move in whatever direction they wish. Then the doctor should gently guide the mandible until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer a purgative with hot water and oil until a slight reduction of both is made and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
And when they are returned and secured, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place on those little pouches of cloth with wax, made from beeswax and rose oil; and then bind them gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be supported between two pillows so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything. When their food has been cut into small pieces, until the pain has subsided and the jaws are loose, then they may eat whatever they want.
And this should be administered gently, and do not work or speak through the mouth while eating, drinking, and talking, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they are not returned to their places, then great care should be taken to avoid fevers and constant sweating, and quickly raise the patient's belly, and quickly induce vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and great care should be taken because he who experiences this will die within ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the clavicle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside of the chest due to its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which can be determined by touch.
And the recovery of the patient is that he should lie on his back and extend his arms. Then immediately close the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return.
Then place a poultice and powder on that area and bind it tightly.
But if the end of that which is the elbow and is continuous with it is not dislocated, then it should be reduced and splinted as we have said, according to your ability.
Then place a poultice and powder on that area, bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to remain calm and at rest until healed.
And with this same treatment is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .26.
About reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the attachment at the base to the attachment below.
The second is that it is dislocated from the attachment above the muscle, and this occurs late; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front of the nerves.
And especially if it is dislocated and has exited from the joints, you should tickle it, especially in those [joints] where there are few fleshy parts; it is easily dislocated. But in those [joints] where there are many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
"And if a strong blow or fall occurs to some men, and the muscle of them becomes swollen with an acute inflammation, it is believed that this is due to a dislocation.
"Therefore, it is necessary for you to be sure about this before you proceed with the treatment of him.
"And it is known that the dislocation of him occurs at the joints where you should tickle; in order to distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find concavity at the head of the muscle, and after tickling it, touch the head of the muscle like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor can they move it any further.
"If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle, you will find a clearly discernible swelling that is not hidden.
"And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is recent and the patient is a child.
"And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the patient's hand to the upper parts; and then places their fingers under the ticklish part of them, and lifts the joint strongly back into its place, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand, and extends it outward; and then places it down because it returns easily.
Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line into English:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here's my attempt at translating the given text into English: If the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him who causes another be suspended, so that he becomes heavy, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another way: which is that a long post be fixed in the ground, the top of which is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient is placed under it; since cloths are placed on top of the post's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended towards the part below the other part; and his body is stretched in the opposite direction with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a post whose length is two arms long, and its width be four fingers, and its thickness be less towards the top like this:
And then round cloths should be tied on top to prevent the post from hurting the patient.
Then the patient should be placed under the top of the post, and their hand or arm should be extended onto the post up to the fingertips. And the post should be tied around the arms and hands at the wrist.
Approach and place the arms on a ladder step according to the size, with the hand extended towards the lower parts, and let the other thing be suspended from the other side, because the joint is about to enter.
When the entry of it is completed according to whatever manner possible for you, then place a small woolen pillow beneath; and next, apply a plaster made from powder of mills with onion juice and egg white over all the muscle, wrapped around it; and next, strengthen the pillow tightly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
It is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
Then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and he should be made to move; and thus if it is fixed and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects him or for another reason, then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be administered to it, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and after approximately seven days the bandage and joint are not healed, and the dressing and the stricture have been applied several times, and it still is not healed but instead, he cannot raise that arm to its original position, then you should know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut, stretched, or softened, and you should know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the foot and ankle or the back of the leg, reduction is done with traction and extension by hand until it returns to its place.
And then apply the other bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And if there is heaviness in the limb and slowness of its movement after healing, then let the patient take warm baths several times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most often to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it appears below the armpit or below the touch according to whatever shape it is dislocated in. And when you set the dislocated shoulder with the hand, this is clearly indicated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can that muscle touch its own place.
And it is necessary that you cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the acute stage, because if it reaches the acute stage, reduction will be difficult and a severe injury will not heal completely; especially when it occurs in the posterior joints, for this type of dislocation is worse than all others, more painful, and many times people die from it.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce [the dislocation], is that the patient's hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be spread, and the doctor's hands be on the elbow from below, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of both his hands together, or with the back of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the anterior joints, then return [the limb] by bending the hand with his own hand until it strikes the elbow with the back of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and great force.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in this manner by two assistants so that it is not moved away from the extension.
And then turn the arms completely around, because they are wrapped in a long folded cloth on his hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps to lubricate the joint for ease; and then press on the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And then for the reduction of the swelling, it should be placed on a poultice in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be pulled tightly downward, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then untie it; and so if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you may unbind him and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not yet strong, then you should repeat the poultice and the binding, and leave it for several days until it is strengthened; and then unbind it.
But if there is gravity after the reduction of the joint, and his condition is in motion, then administer moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place on the joint aleliates, which are thick cushions; and then bind it, and leave it on the bones day and night. And then remove that [cloth or bandage], and place him in a bath; and when he gets out, then you should rub the joint with warm friction, and then repeat on that area, as if it were moving, once, and the second time, and the third time. In the middle of the bath, until he is thoroughly cleansed.
And if you wish, place a wet and scraped cowhide on that opening and secure it with a bandage over it; do this several times, because that [cowhide] is moist and will bring the area back to its proper condition.
Chapter 28.
About treating a dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
A dislocation of the hand can sometimes occur, and its reduction is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important that the reduction be done quickly in the hour in which it was dislocated, before the site becomes swollen or a swelling occurs there.
The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand. The physician then places their hand or palm over the top of the joint and presses until it returns to its proper place.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a compress to drain the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do, neither will you tolerate nor be able to endure the reduction of the pus that passes throughout the day.
But the joint remains according to its twisted nature; and do not attribute any cause to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or squeezed, and there is no remedy for it except to strengthen it with a cautery near its seat and give it some cause.
Therefore, when the illness has returned, then place on it the compress which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and afterward, it should be loosened and let out, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
But if the patient's movement is stopped and some gravity occurs in them, then relieve that with hot water and rubbing several times until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the treatment of dislocation in the said joints.
Sometimes the said joints are dislocated entirely.
When one of these fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or the front of it, then hold the finger steady and use your thumbs to push the dislocation back until it returns to its original position.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened in its own time.
And at night, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movements, and bandage it again at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same with it, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and bandage it to that part and do with it the same first operation until it is healed.
Do the same for dislocations in other parts as well.
Chapter .30
About the treatment of spinal dislocations on the back.
When a full dislocation of one of the spine's vertebrae on the back or neck occurs and many vertebrae are moved from their places, in that case there is no cure, for death comes to the patient.
Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
"Therefore, when that area has already been moved to the back parts and is called jaundice.
"But the treatment of it is that you must then consider if the jaundice is due to childbirth, because in this case there is no cure or recovery at all.
"But for those cases that come about due to a fall or a blow or something similar to these, the ancients have already spoken about the methods of treatment at length, from which one derives the most profit; but I have abbreviated it, retaining only the essentials and avoiding excessive detail, in order to make my presentation more accessible. With this method, I will now explain and discuss the following.
"And none of those can be cured except for the one that occurs in the back specifically, as I will explain.
"And the patient should be laid face down on a soft cushion near a wall, and a wet cloth should be placed beneath him so that his feet are not lifted.
And then place a straight pole in the ground at the head end of the bed near the patient's head, and another pole at the foot end of the bed under the patient's feet.
And let one assistant hold the pole and not fix it in a hole; and another assistant should hold the other one similarly.
Then wrap around the patient's head and under their chin tie a band firmly; extend the end of the band to the pole near their head, and tie it there; then strengthen another band over their hips and at the back of their knees, and under their thighs; then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other pole near their feet.
Then let each assistant extend the band to the edge of the pole, and the two poles and their bands should not be moved from their places where they are placed, but rather should remain unfixed as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's back with strength until he returns to consciousness, or place something over that, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns to consciousness.
But if he does not return to consciousness with this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three spans, and carve out a place in the wall near where we said the patient is located, so that the end of the table fits into it. And then place the majority of the table over the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end of the table, and tighten it securely so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish to do this, open the bed that is revolving with your hand; and if you want to place the patient's head at the foot of two posts, let the length of each post be one arm's length, and also place the patient's head at the foot of two more posts; and let the distance between each pair of posts be one palm's width. And in each post, make a hole through which a cord can pass, and let each post be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should also be a round post through which the cord passes, and this post should be turned in the holes of the two posts.
And at the end of it is a hole through which the post, whose length is one palm, is turned; and in the two other posts, there should be something similar to this.
Then tighten the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet in the hole where his head should be placed, and the ropes that you have tied to his hips in the cord where his feet should be placed.
And then you should have one servant for each turn who turns the patient with their hand, and the doctor should check the spine as we mentioned.
And then, after the spine is turned and the area is checked, you should place a desiccating poultice made with egg white, and then cover it; and then place on top of the poultice a board whose width is about three fingers or so, and whose length covers the swollen area and extends to the spine.
And then bind it with the bandage mentioned earlier, and feed the patient nourishing food until they are healed.
And if there is any swelling remaining in the area after healing, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be administered along with a long-term diet as we recommended earlier; and in that area, a lead sheet has already been applied.
And sometimes swelling occurs at the end of the spine in the back, and it is believed to be caused by dislocation; and that bone is called the one that swells because it should not be treated with this medicine, as it will cause you to die.
Chapter 31
About the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that the hip joint and the muscular joint should only be considered as a dislocation and nothing more than what happens to other smaller or less convex joints.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: by displacement inside, or by displacement outside, or by displacement in front, or by displacement behind.
And it is most often dislocated by displacement inside, and rarely by displacement in front or behind.
And the sign of its dislocation inside is that, when you align the healthy leg with the patient's leg, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, and in this place there will be an inflammation of cold aposteme, because the head of the bone has already reached here.
And the sign that it is dislocated by displacement outside is that its symptoms are contrary to this symptom.
And the sign of one who has dislocation by displacement in front is that he extends his thigh according to its course, but however cannot bend it without pain in the thigh, and if he forces himself to walk, he cannot go forward; and his urine is retained and his groin is swollen, and he walks on his ankles.
And the sign of that person to whom dislocation occurs in the back parts is that they cannot expand their knee nor can they bend it as much as they could before the injury, and their thigh is shorter than the other, and the knee becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is displaced from its place.
But the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, and if it has already been treated by others before you, then administer reduction accordingly to its condition, but in such a case, not all curative measures are necessary; therefore, it is not advisable to proceed hastily.
However, in the case of recent dislocation and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you should approach it so that you return the joint and extend it to its inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will quickly return to normal and no other treatment is needed.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare strong assistants and extend the patient's leg from below the knee, either with their hands or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend the hand of the patient so that they place their hands below his thighs; and then immediately tie the end of the bandage over the top of the thigh, and another assistant should hold the free end of the bandage.
And if the extension of it or the part inside the elbow is to the inside of the fork, or the part behind is to the back.
And if all of these are present at once, then raise the patient up off the ground with his body and let him remain hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then everything that has been said about proper treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is on the inside parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back; and then place the bandages over the front of the thigh in the area between the head of the thigh and the place below the elbow; and then extend the bandage from above the part of the elbow to the highest part of the fork.
And then another strong assistant should take the patient's arms and firmly grasp the thick part of the injured thigh and strongly extend it outward, for this returns it to its place.
And this type is easier to treat when this limb is reduced than the other types.
"But if you are unable to comply with this treatment and do not follow it precisely, then the patient's two feet should be bound tightly and lightly together at both ankles and both heels.
"And let the length of each be four fingers' width, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by two fingers' width.
"And then the patient should be suspended upside down over the top of a pole, and they should be in this position; and let their length from the ground be two arms' length.
"And then command a strong young man to lessen the space of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should push the cushion forcefully, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
"But in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation that has moved outward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back as we have recommended; and let the bandage be strengthened especially on the sick leg and on his feet.
"And then two poles should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then thin poles should be placed in the middle of the cushion, covered with wet cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between his thighs, because you must ensure that the extension at the sides is not impeded.
And each assistant extends his part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is advisable that the thigh be slightly extended and according to this same narrative, place it on a stool; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the patient's knee, and then presses it with the other hand, and with that pressure, he extends the part behind towards the back of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not advisable that the patient be extended backwards, and he should be elevated off the ground; rather, it is necessary for him to be placed on a hard surface, just as we have said about the lifting if his hip is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we have said about placing him on two hips; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is not much.
And it is necessary that a compression with a board be applied over the area where the joint is located.
And when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you do not see any sign of the reduction on the patient, and you have extended both legs of the patient, and when you see that they are bent and the patient extends their leg without excuse, then you know that the member has returned as it should — at this point you prepare two cushions, apply a poultice and compress with a bandage in such a way that the swelling is not increased on any side; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
At this point, if you see them straightened, then you know that the dislocation has already been stabilized, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a poultice to it, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and make the patient delay walking on each one for some days, until it is healed.
De doloribus membrorum.
"Chapter XXXII. On the pain of limbs.
The eye is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, and to the inner parts, and more often to the rear parts; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his thigh to his hip; then you will know that the eye is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its kinds is that you make the patient lie flat, so that he can extend his thigh if possible; then adhere your thumb to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make your thumbs adhere to his eye with your fingers, and press these strongly on his eye with strength, and another minister extends his foot until the eye returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that his thigh adheres to his hip with easy effortlessness.
Then plaster that [area] and make the thigh adhere to the hip, and then bind both together at the same time with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for some days, until he is healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of him to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter .33.
Of the treatment of talus dislocation.
The talus is sometimes moved by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the joint, and its dislocation occurs either at the internal or external parts of the joint.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the talus swelling towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its reduction is easy, and that it be extended with ease by the hands and then covered until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the joint, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down straight, and let him have a strong and skilled assistant behind his back in the middle of his body.
And then you take with your right hand the foot from the higher part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left for two times, and then extend it with the left; and rub the sole of the foot with the right behind the knee without effort.
And do this twice as we have said.
And then rub the sole of the foot against the leg the third time, and you should be at the knee.
Therefore, if you return once or twice in this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the procedure on him, for that returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and tie a strong rope firmly to the ground, and let it pass between his thighs, and you have already wrapped him in cloth so that the patient does not slip.
And then let one of his servants hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with his hands or with a rope that lies on the ankle; and then let each servant stretch against the extension of his partner, and let the rope be stretched between the patient's thighs holding him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
And immediately the doctor pushes the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy joint below, because the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and it is clear to you that the reduction of the patient is complete, then place a plaster and bind it strongly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you must be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, because the bandage over it should not be too tight and should hold it firmly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days. But if the patient is forced to walk within that period, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive treatment.
And if it happens that an abscess forms, then you should administer in the suppuration of it what was previously said in another part of the treatise about treatment and poultices, until it is removed.
Chapter XXXIV
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
It should be enveloped with a small bandage without causing much difficulty; indeed, this is easier than difficult.
However, if the dislocation is in any of the toes at the back of the foot, then you should make the patient sit with their foot on a flat surface or table, and they should be sitting as if walking.
Then you should stand on the toes of the patient, placing your foot on the joint where it protrudes, and press down with your foot until it returns to its original position, ensuring that it appears wrapped and not protruding.
Then place under the sole of the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two handles, and bind it tightly and firmly for three days; then unbind it and have the patient rest from walking for several days, until it is healed and the recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV
On the types of dislocation that occur with wounds, or fractures, or both together.
When any of these causes occur, and you undertake the treatment and restoration of it, many times death occurs. ️
Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that. Here it is: And then immediately strive to make a reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess is formed.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that prevents an abscess and treats the wound with suitable drying ointments.
And if there is dislocation with fracture and the shin bones are separated, then pierce their marrow, and do what we have said in simple illnesses concerning this, as preceded in those places.
And be careful and avoid according to your ability that which is contrary to the ways of fear, as my preceding words have instructed you; for this is better for you in obedience to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body during your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis, may God be blessed with them. Amen.
