O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign and unknown throughout, its knowledge has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it but the slight descriptions found in books by the ancients, which our hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and knowledge has been removed.
Now it seems to me that I will animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for it, as it is necessary.
And because no good hand-masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of the blood vessels moving and resting, and where they come from.
And Hypocras says that what is known by name is little, but what is known by action is much; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned earlier, be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he punctured the arteries in the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor treating a man's hernia stone, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui traït une piere de coliche d’une femme et li estraignia les intestins et la vessie, et le fust mors en  .iiij. jors.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
And I saw another patient who was treated by a doctor from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant doctors tightened the fracture on top of the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any padding on the wound, and left it with a lump; and they ordered him not to move it. And he remained like that until his leg, foot, and toe became swollen and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he immediately felt peace and no more pain.
However, the corruption had already set in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
And I saw another doctor who punctured an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
For when a ulcer is free of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you.
Take up your weapons then with caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best path so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grievous illness; and put aside those things which cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on yourself a difficult illness unless you are called the foolish miracle."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is appropriate that I describe the nature of each temperament and its harm.
I say that the qualities of temperament and harm are the longest subject and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about it, and agreed on this: and I am content with their words, for I desire brevity.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, and there are .ij. complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexions, some people have said that cautery is very helpful; while others say the opposite—that cautery does not help illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise, that cautery aids hot and dry illnesses in the human body. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And nevertheless, let no one meddle in this except those who have tried it and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we fear not at all the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery with fire gathers up the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicines.
For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member unless named.
Burning medicines travel from one member to another in this way, and bring about grievous diseases and bad healing; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and have placed above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration. So receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose their days.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary pains that are forceful and urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say it thus: but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not medicine that moves the complexion, and dry the humors that cause the pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the disease and its location and its strength; and are assembled in it the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, yet they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they fail, then we apply cauterization, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold instruments is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people.
And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately if overheated; and they heat it in fire, and there are many hazards.
And for this we use the fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types made due to a condition called "soda", and due to many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all conditions arising from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar maladies.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient be purged by a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the palm of your hand between his nose and upper lip, between his two eyes; and where your index finger points, there will you apply the cautery, which is called "olive-wood", of which here is the form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while twisting; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you can see a small bone; and if you do not, reapply the cautery as I have instructed until you see the bone. Then take a piece of silk, place some soft cotton inside it, moisten with butter, and apply over the spot; let this remain until the scorching is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients say that when an open wound remains uncovered for longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise the use of leeches.
And some say that one must let the cautery burn so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then one can heal what has been burned in the bone.
And others say that one must let the cautery burn so long and press so hard that one reduces the bone as much as a woman's finger, so that the humors may issue forth; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, after which one may heal it and dress it.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem good to me in all things, except in some people where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and with this I work together salvation.
of the old pain in the head
When a chronic headache comes to the whole head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we mentioned earlier and it doesn't help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize it with that fire cautery a little as we said above.
Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and make one cautery in the place where one uses leeches; there is a place for leeches on the head; and lift your hand so that you do not go to the bone: the patient feels much more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how to do it:
of the cautery on the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies that I have described in the division of diseases have been applied without success: then make cauteries according to two methods, namely with hot water and with fire.
The cautery with hot water is that you take an onion, remove the outer skin and coat it with honey twice, then make a poultice of it and apply it to the area where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the onion underneath the skin; and when it has been applied, bind it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the onion, and leave the wound as it is for two or three days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter over it until suppuration occurs.
After the wound has healed, if you see fit to use any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The fire cautery is performed as follows: Heat the cautery so that it is red hot.
And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the form of a cowl with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small opening; and he places it over the painful area, and holds his hand and slightly turns it so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and he lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is a bad omen, and blood flows profusely.
Afterward, put cotton in the wound and leave it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this wound with the knife-like cautery, do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this wound which is not old.
of wound
When you treat wounds as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries we have previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a finger long over the painful area, and lift your hand once, and press down so that you do not touch the artery and so that the blood does not flow to the bone; and be careful of the mandible so that it does not close when one chews, and the nerve has no effect on the patient, and spasms do not occur; and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, and cutting causes great fear in someone who is unaware and inexperienced; leave the wound open halfway; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of ear pain from cold
When ear pain comes from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», of which this is the shape:
After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the site to be cauterized; and there should be .x. points around each ear; then treat the site until it is healed.
of mouth torture
There is no cautery for the torture that comes from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearances that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from moisture and fluids, and if gargling and purgatives for the head do not work, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: one cautery at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; and apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the corner of the head, and another cautery on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery tool:
And it is the same as the scalpel we described earlier, but it should be a little more flexible and the blade should be a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on each horn of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz," as we said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. Treat it as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large pills and cleansing powders for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster described in the section on plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of one finger between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on each horn, and cure him as before. Let the cautery be that which is called "olivare," as I said before.
of coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other matter as we have said before; then raise the patient's head, next cauterize in the head and on each temple, one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, he should be cauterized four times on the spine of the back; then let it be until the heart's heat is felt, then lift your hand; afterward, dress the wound until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except those who are phlegmatic; first, cleanse the brain of hair and other matter as we have said in the section on great and suffering illnesses requiring medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's head in the middle, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is fierce and suffering, make cauteries as I said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the illness is in an infant, make for him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with those cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist from the illness, then give him something to drink by which the brains may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
After you have treated the head of the sick person; then make a small torque out of linen well made, as a circle, and put it around the head; and the sick person must be cross-bound, and be held tightly on all sides; then bring forward the poultice, and apply moxa made from old sheep's wool; and heat it gently with fire, so that he can bear the heat; then remove the circle from within around the head, and let it cool; and do this for the sick person once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make several small burns all over the cautery instrument. This cautery method cools down the brain quickly; and then put on wet cotton padded with suet and chicken fat.
of the eyes When eye problems first arise from the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After he commands him to raise his head, and cauterizes the scalp, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is from both eyes together, or one if it is from just one; and covers all the cauteries throughout the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization: sometimes cauteries or fire are made under the two bones at the back.
where the body weeps
When the tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or within the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery which I said earlier for the descent of the eye: one cautery in the scalp, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or fires under the two bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
with tears from within them
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not improve, then give the patient 3 nights of poultices; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize with an olive-sized cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the papery of the eye is softened by sickness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare." And here is its form:
And if you see two warts on the same finger as long as the warts are; and do not leave the hand except that one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
the hair that pokes the eye Sometimes the hair in the eye is converted to the parched state, and pokes the eye, and they perform cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, mark on the paper their shape, which should be like the leaf of the bay tree, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and mustard seed paste over the eye, then heat the cautery so that its shape is:
After cauterizing over the shape you marked little by little many times, so that it burns in the right spot; and the sign of the health of the eye is when you see the paper pulled away, and the hairs lifted at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for 3 days; then moisten cotton with butter until the scorch is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then start the cautery over that same spot again, just as you did before; and if the hair falls out, then cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural state, and let the hairs grow back even and not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take French soap and live coals, each a 1/3, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the bay leaf, and put it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if both, then likewise; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state, and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it bites like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift up the skin, and check if you see the skin raised as it was by the constraining of fire or by incision; and if so, then all is well. If not, apply more medicine to the site where the medicine had not taken effect, until your work is even and your eyes focused; then put on moist cotton in tallow until the wound is healed, after which cleanse the area with an ointment called "diafenes" and others, until it is healthy.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area where the skin has softened properly, just as you did before; after which cleanse it until it is healthy; and this is the way to treat an eye infection:
And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for one who has studied this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have an assistant hold his head between their hands so that he does not move or lower his head; then moisten cotton with egg white or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which is shaped like a feather quill, with one end pointed and the other blunt; although the blunt one is better for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat it and dry it out; and if it is closed, open it and draw out any pus towards the bowel; then place a hot cautery on it carefully, and hold your hand on the cautery near the eye socket so that your hand doesn't move foolishly; and apply the cautery to the fat of the eye socket, corrupting it.
If you reach the bone with the cautery at the beginning, that is good; but if not, then re-apply the cautery again and do so a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days; afterwards place wet cotton soaked in butter over it, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed; and if 40 days pass and it is still unhealed, apply an corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed; and treat the king according to what ails him.
And there is one way of cauterizing a fistula that some ancient ones spoke of. Cut towards the fistula and open the area; afterwards place a thin thread of wax in the opening so that it reaches the source of the pain: and they make it the size of a bean; and hold your hand on the thread firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten wax does not enter their eye; and one should place wet cotton soaked in vinegar or oil over the eye, the wax will reach the source of the fistula, and heal it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, that is good. If not, then one must apply a wound to the nail, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is proper in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," and especially in the lips of children.
When you heal these cracks as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And he applies heat to these cracks until they come to a head; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat, or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, and it causes a pustule and rot and becomes a fistula, and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not heal: then you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After cauterizing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and affects the area underneath; do this once or twice, after treating the wound as we have described in the section on cures, until it is healed. If it is healed by this method, well and good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in the affected area.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the sick person in your mouth; after, heat the cautery which the form of the tooth will come next in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after, lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; after, fill the mouth of the patient with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
And in this way, the tooth which was moving is now stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
of dental pain
When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and treatment with medicine does not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautery with butter is such that you press butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or bronze; afterwards take cotton and wrap it over the tip of a needle, and moisten it in butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the butter moistens the wool and cotton, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron over it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Fire cautery is such that you take a piece of iron or bronze, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the shape will come out, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very day or the next. And the patient should fill his mouth with cool butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then breathe in the smoke; and this is how the cautery is done:
When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery iron so that the form of the scrofula appears, and has two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery once on the abscess, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton with butter and place it on the burn until the scabs are removed; after that, treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medicines; after that, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, but only burn a little bit. Then apply another cautery at the junction between the neck and the head at the top of the spine, using the iron called 'clavicle' as we described earlier; then treat the area as we have already described until it is healed.
of the tooth When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called 'clavicle' according to the form that was previously described.
And if you see fit, make cauteries on the points all over the cautery that is called 'points', according to the form that was previously described for ear diseases; and let there be thirty points or more equally spaced around. After healing the site as described earlier, perform three cauterizations according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
of the shoulder dislocation: When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, stroke the patient on their back and sides; then, gently lift the testicles with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery with two fingers until it is hot enough. The shape of this cautery instrument should be as follows:
then cauterize the testicles until it penetrates to the cost, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and this is why the cautery with three fingers is made, so that there are six cauteries in total; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery instrument with three fingers:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, apply the porridge-like cautery with a cloth; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, very little happens, so apply cautery on the thick part of the clavicle with a cautery needle, or many cauteries in turns. For the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient healed.
with cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from roots of aristotle, and in such a way: take a long root of aristotle, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize .1. cautery between the armpit and the collarbone, and .2. small cauteries a little lower down on the side that is under the beard; and .2. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1. cautery in the groin, and 1. another one over the stomach, and 1. between the two shoulders, and 2. at the sides of the groin, avoiding the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it smoothly as if applying a perfume.
And some ancients say that a man should use a cautery of fire like a razor, heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and often without pain, as we have said in the liver abscess. But in this work there is fear or death to the patient, or a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have described in the sections on cures, and it does not help, then there are three good ways to cauterize:
Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, cutting according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we described earlier; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the skin where the pain is, or where the pain comes from the left side, and the elevation should be according to the shape of the body, and the cautery should follow the width of the body.
Afterwards, insert the two points into the flame until the skin is pierced on the other side; then pull the cautery towards you, and in this way, there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize with all three points. Afterwards, when the sore has bled for a long time, and it is better than the other sores mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except for the method called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must give him .iiij cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the chest, two on the spine, and one on the buttocks; and the cautery should be close to the chest wall.
Afterward, let the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the wound after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus it will draw out the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
After making two incisions on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg, apply two long cauteries with a scalpel; and leave the cauteries untouched for a long time without dressing until the pus comes out; then dress the other wounds as we have described.
of the moon
When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and very weak, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was described earlier for the stomach cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel, one cautery clavicle below the navel, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the patient suffering from abundant moisture, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cautery is beneficial when there is good circulation.Et si li est trop de moistors, et tu vois li sang en isse par la ventrez, fai l’incision sus la ventrez par le mi-cau, car si li sang est de la ventrez et non de la veine, il ne sera pas mist, et li malaide soit mort.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated by division as we have said, but it is unhelpful, then make cauteries: 3 on the spine of the back, that which is completely cut under the armpit little by little in a triangle shape, and 1 cautery under the arm. 2 fingers;
And if you think his stomach is cold and the food is not digested, and one sees the face swollen, then to the face make 1 large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the spleen with a long cauterizing tool; and leave the cautery in place for a long time. After that, treat the area until it is healed.
of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
When you apply the cautery, heat it until it looks like a razor, and then place it directly on the shaven skin; hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the vein's opening, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of skin, cauterize each one as we have said; after this, treat the wound with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide greater relief.
from wounds that were not properly treated
When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, as we will describe in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a patient has an ulcer that is suppurating and oozing pus and corrupted moisture, you should first examine it thoroughly and determine how deep the ulcer is. Then heat the cautery until it looks like a razor and insert it into the ulcer according to its depth, and repeat this process with the cautery one, two, or three times according to its needs; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins. If the ulcer goes deep into the bladder and intestines, be careful of these areas, and do not apply the cautery directly to bones, and think that it is not sensible. After treating the area until it is healed, if the wound is still oozing pus, know that it is not fully healed; and if the pus is not draining, know that the bone at its base is affected and corrupted. Then proceed as instructed for such cases.
of kidney disease When the pain comes from cold and is accompanied by strong winds, and does not subside in a woman, then you must apply cautery to the kidneys on both sides using the chisel cautery that we mentioned earlier. If we cauterize it in the middle, there will be .iij cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, with one cautery on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb. And you will do one cautery above the back, or two if you see the need; and the cauteries should be chisel-shaped as described earlier.
of diseases When the disease is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, they feel great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and 2 cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be on the clavicle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistors descend to the box of the hip, and due to this they move out of their place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the departure are hollow, then one should cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be like those by which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three large cauteries from the olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the sores; and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain in the hip When pain arises in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the disease is chronic and resistant to the treatments mentioned earlier, then you must purge the patient of the gross humours with foul-smelling pills or similar good pills.
After that, apply cautery; and there are two ways of applying cautery: with burning medicines or with fire. Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is to cauterize the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, making a deep and large wound, with the space between each cautery the size of a thumb; the cauteries should be made from olive wood. Another method is to make a cautery in the centre of the hip joint, so that there are four cauteries according to this shape:
And if you see, the cautery with the circular cauterizer that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the way one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, one makes .2 cauterizations where the patient feels the pain, one cauterization where the pain holds, and another cauterization above the ankle joint on the left side a little; and let the cautery be with a knife, burning through the thickness of the skin. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or more places in the foot or nearby, then cauterize there where they feel the pain .3 or 4 times using the cautery called "points".
And if it is necessary, make more; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make the cautery with a knife or circularly, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have had cautery performed on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After that, he died from a rupture in his abdomen.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery on one and then the other according to this method. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner: make a iron rod as thick as a thumb, or a little less, and it should be notched all around with notches spaced out by the amount of a finger joint; and the notches should be on both sides, and they should also be like fingers, and there should be a handle made well. And this is the form:
And it should be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then one should place it on the joint of the ill hip, and turn it onto the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be used once with one cautery rod and left for three days. Then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sight, and we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which those who can bear it should use where it is needed.
of pain in the back
When pain comes in the back, from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or by similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is fitting, after the patient has been purged with foul pills or similar remedies, that one should make three marked lines on his back where the pain is located, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be performed according to the cautery called "the point"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery needle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight back when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the last vertebrae of the back, and in us it appears on the other vertebrae.
When you see one and see it treated, then cauterize it with a cautery of celery according to this form.
The purple cautery colors every part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij or .iij lines apart, and let the points be close to each other. After that, cure the site until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to use cautery on any swelling that is in a nerve ganglion.
of joint pain
When joint pains are from moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
And if there is a need for you to prick the sole of the foot, do cauterization with the entire cautery that is called "point." And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do cauterization on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries in each part, with all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand there longer than until the thickness of the heart is burned.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, prick around the wrist for 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good treatment for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good treatment for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
of the root of the ulcer
When the ulcer comes in wounds, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is new, then when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpits so that the bowels are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ointment underneath the ulcer on the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
let it grow until it turns white and falls off. Then reset the bones to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not move back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put underneath him a cushion and a servant on each thigh, and another one on his feet who holds his hands; then place the cautery on the affected area all over your palm, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you get to the bone; and be careful that the blisters do not pop when you apply the cautery, so that you do not burn him; and take care that through this the patient does not die or suffer harm.
And you should know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are useless. And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults it should be as big as their size; after three days, treat the area around the cautery with butter until the scorch mark is removed; then treat it with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well-healed; and his hair should be left to grow for a long time so that the blisters do not pop when he tries to move around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made brace is provided for him, and he wears it for another 40 days; and has good rest, so that he does not move too much and takes care to avoid too much drinking, eating, and loud laughing; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for dislocating his shoulder. of the bowels
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then do .j cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a four-angled cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of entry and draw a line along the width above the ulcer, and another from above, and hold your hand in the middle of the cauterization throughout. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mild.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to a limb from falling or wounding, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtuosity and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healed from the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of that one, for such a habit is that it should move in the limb nearest to which it is, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
from mixing
Mixing is sometimes helped by cautery with great care, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither decreases nor persists, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on the corners, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize it according to what is in front.
And if the mixing is scattered everywhere and it is manifestly losing, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another one next to it, and two on the shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the lower calf bone, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes do a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the stomach bone, and one on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and benefits; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupt. And cauterization should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in the methods of iron tools. After treatment, cleanse the site with wheat flour and honey, and other treatments until it heals.
of swelling
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly warm at the depth of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but one should not attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exit points of the nerves that move the body.
of albars
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of beans and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, of each one part; and mix all together, and tie it with a cloth, and air in the location until it is healed.
the cure for cancer by cautery
When cancer comes at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the cancer. And yet, wise people say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes. A more careful thing is to cauterize all around, with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot be cured
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is late to die, either because of the superfluity that it causes, or because of the age of the disease when it is decrepit (that is, very old), and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize him all around with many small cauteries; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see him piercing throughout the cautery, then heat the cautery tool of which this is the shape:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them deeply in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved. After that, dress the wound until it is perfectly healed.
the fire cure by iron
Another kind of disease there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the limb, for it corrupts the limbs just as fire does to dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both large and small, according to what is needed in the place where the disease is; then cauterize all over until you reach the whole corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas an ointment with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure of ointments that generate flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, that is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this corruption has sometimes been cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of much greater help, and I have already described the cure for medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of warts that come on the feet
It often happens that on the feet, through deficiency, there arises a disease which in our opinion is called  "clots", and it is a hard lump that breaks the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods. That is, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water. Cautery with fire is that you heat 1 cautery-iron just like a pen, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can touch the nail all over, and that it has thin edges; then put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it as such for 3 days so that it starts to produce pus; then make an ointment of mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted by its roots. Then cure the place with ointment generating flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by going through the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you must administer hot-water cautery; and it is in such a way: take an iron or bronze rod, or a pen of vutul, and place it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say, warts; and place the rod so that it covers the entire area, then apply a little warm water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn it so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and thus find the hot water deeply penetrates to the root; and let the patient endure the bite of the hot water for a while; then leave it thus, and it will be pulled out by its roots. Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
the cure for trembling
When some people tremble from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or from other causes, then you should do four cauteries, or four on each side of the spine, one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus it will cease the trembling, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
of foul pustules
None appear on the body sometimes but foul pustules, which come from great putrid matters. One should first cauterize at the top of each pustule when they appear, using a thin cautery made from myrtle-wood, with its tip taken to the fire, or long aristolochia root, or lenticular cautery. Sometimes one should cauterize them at their appearance according to this manner, and they cannot grow further from where they came, but the superfluities from which they come are disrupted, and they are healed; however, one must do this after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
And yet, when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein and squeeze it hard until the blood is calmed under your finger and no drops come out; then put in the fire olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, as many as are needed, until they are all red; then take .i., either a large or small one according to the wound and where the artery is running, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger off the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not cease to do this with one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well-stopped immediately if the artery is large, except by one of four methods which we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Whoever applies a tight binding with bandages or placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not help then it is no good.Et quant li sans decourt d’une artere qui est petite, et que ne pooit mie estre restenchiee de nule maniere qui nos avons dit, si covient que l’on le fie par medicines qui ont pooir de restenchir; et si le sans decourt d’une artere grasse, si doit il estre restenchiz par liement ou par cautere.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any mirth or present medicine, then one should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein; and one should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swelled and constricted; and make inquiries beforehand about what they need in terms of cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease that requires cauterization by fire, or burning medicine, and the poultices, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have covered that chapter from head to foot, and I will continue on the same path in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore one must be more cautious. Car li perils et li paors que on encuntre por les tailles de s’estomache, et les maux que il en advient, si com est la piere, et l’estracions d’elle, et les saings et les maux qu’on encuntre, et les estrumens qui conviennent, et les cauteres.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. Because people come to cures in many ways. Some are so worn down by their illness that they would recover quickly if it weren't for the delusions they experience because of their sickness, and the severity of their wickedness; and one must fear these types. And among these are those who recover their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place more importance on your honor than on your desires. Act wisely and cautiously in what you know and can prove, and use prophecy and indication in treating your illnesses, for salvation is turned towards these. And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Very dear son, may Our Lord give you wisdom and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath from his hand, amen.
Here I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what it is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the head is squeezed too hard during childbirth; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all those that I have seen, death has followed; and because of this, it seems better to me to leave the treatment out of such cases.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his skull grew larger every day until he could no longer support it; and he believed that the moisture would kill him, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should split a large opening in the middle of the skull; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of spatumile:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the openings of the skull on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it has not closed again: then you should split the skull in three places according to this manner:
And after the incision, squeeze out all the moisture. After that, bind the splits with bandages and powder, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and anointing, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat from a pot of moisture as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
So cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid, and do it according to what you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
of gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut open the two arteries.
When you see them bending forward, the patient should bend back his head; then rub the area around an artery with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then hold the patient's neck with all your strength using a cloth; then look where the vein is pulsating, and the pulse points are after the ears, and they are barely visible; then sign the pulse points with a cross, then bind both of them with a bandage made from a pointed piece of cloth two parts in width so that the bandage reaches the bone, and this should be done on the side of the head.
And if you see it, tie the bandage under the artery and over it, cutting also as two parts across.
And when the vein is bound, then the blood flows upwards continuously.
And if the artery does not open to feel it, then you should measure the amount of space of three inches, then sign inwards and cut to the bone; and what it needs for the blood to flow out is 1/4 cup, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone no trace of pus, so that no abscesses come from it, then strain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
from grain
When old grain comes, and a catarrh occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and ancient madness and similar things, and medicine does not help him through various methods of treatment, then we must cut the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is for the patient to pull back the hair from his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, for it will be evident by its pulse, and is not very deep in some people who are too cold; if it is deep, the patient should stretch his neck backward with a cloth, then rub the area with some coarse cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery becomes visible; then take the spatulum, from which comes the shape:
then pull the skin gently until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the layers of tissue beneath; if the artery is thin, then pull it to the tip of the nail, then cut it according to the amount of the .ij chiés (a unit of measurement). For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow properly.
And draw out blood from the vein, just to three ounces; and if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow gently; then sop up the excess fluid between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the main course of treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
For cautery helps to finish moistures; therefore it is of greater help for moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and places on it tents well made; and when they are taken off, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause charring, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as far as you work, you hasten to cover by cauterization, or you employ vitriol and press it to your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you do not have that at hand, put on the spot ice as long as the blood stops, and moisten the spot with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and then bind it as tightly as is appropriate; and what is better and easier in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutting edge should be well thickened to retain its heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat. And you should have between the two knives a distance of a thumb's width, and then when you have burned in both places, you must put the hot iron on as far as the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two heads be separated because they are not joined by this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When tears are flowing from the veins that are above the test of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel pulsation in the forehead as if from trembling; and if the eyelids are drooping and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
And they called it in the past "crushed cure", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make .3 incisions on the forehead evenly along its length; and let one of the incisions be as two thumbs altogether in front going down to the nose, and the other .2 at the sides above the eyelids, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are at the sides above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .2 mandibles, and let each wound be the length of three thumbs across the joints;
from the incision on the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin in between the two incisions down to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, then remove this syringe.
then insert into the first incision the instrument called a «cultellar», which is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is how it is shaped: And place the cutting edge towards the armpit and the blunt edge towards the bone, and insert it as far as the middle incision. Then compress all of the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one that opens from the armpit, and then do the same in the middle incision until it reaches the other one; then draw out the blood evenly, and express the area where the blood was taken; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and moisten it with wine and oil and garlic, and be careful that no pus comes near it; on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When someone has chronic cataracts, and you see their eyes are pale and small, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and hairs grow from them, and in their head there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these signs that these substances and this cataract come only from many veins, and the medicine used to treat it is like this.
And you must command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut through the middle of the forehead, and another from one temple to the other, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which cause movement when eating; and when the bone is exposed, you should suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove any damaged tissue between the two lips of the cut, and insert old cotton there, and apply tenting with linen; then bind it up with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, taking care to avoid abscesses; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then treat it with astringent substances which promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to the wounds to promote healing throughout.
of ear-ach
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or insects, or minerals like iron, or similar objects. It could also be fluids like water, or garlic and similar substances.
When a stone or other object that does not adhere to the ear falls into the ear and does not grow in the ear, one should expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, apply some violet oil or sisament oil, then extract it with forceps; and cause the person to sneeze with a condiment, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and tie a piece of cloth or wool around the ear; and expose the ear to the sun. Often, this will dislodge the object; and if it does not, one should extract it with fine forceps, for which these are the instructions:
If it dislodges with forceps, that is good; if not, then extract it with a fine, small pair of tweezers; and if it does not dislodge thus, make an iron hook and insert the tip into the ear canal firmly, and pack wax around the hook so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull firmly upwards, for often this will work as we have said. And if it does not dislodge thus, take a leech in which to place some instrument made for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the leech against the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. If it does not yield to all the things we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the abscess drains, and there will be a spasm; and the method of splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the head vein, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it hangs; and let the split be like a crescent moon as you come to the stone, then press it with all your might, and suck it eagerly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if there are grains inside and it is swollen, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a .i. subtle spatumile according to this form:
And administer an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with subtle pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the ache that falls into the ear, the patient should use a first-degree nostrum and dry the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on his side where the ache is. If it yields to this, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to your thumb's thickness, and heat them in the fire; then put one end of the stone into the ear, and press the other end with another stone; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until all the ache comes out, and so it will all come out; and if you see fit, take a reed, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the reed is burnt; then do the same with another reed until all the ache comes out, as we have said for the stone.
In extracting the object from the body, if it is small like a flea or similar, remove it as we have described in the previous section. However, if the object is large enough to be felt, use tweezers for extraction; this method is the most suitable for objects lodged in the ear.
When treating earworms, after you have attempted the methods described in the previous section and in the treatment of distilleries, if the cure is ineffective, examine the ear in sunlight; if you see any worms, remove them with fine tweezers. If none are visible, take a small piece of wool and insert it into the ear canal; this will attract and trap the worms.
And it is narrow below and wide above. Insert the thinnest end of the cotton into the ear according to the degree of discomfort experienced by the patient; then gently suck on the entire piece of cotton, repeating this process until all the worms emerge. If they refuse to come out, pack the ear with cotton as I have described in the section on stones; if they still do not emerge as described, administer distillations that the ancients have found effective in the removal of worms, and you will find them described in the section on distillations. Distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this device, which is crafted as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass with a narrow spout and a wider container for distillation; and for pressing the distillation into the ear, use a well-crafted instrument of brass, or take a razor blade and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and any other medicines, into the cotton, and insert the cotton into the ear. Next, place the razor blade over all the cotton and gently press your hand to temper the heat so that the medicine is distilled into the ear; the patient will feel it working inside, and the distillation should be moderately warm as it enters the ear, but not too hot so that the medicine loses its effectiveness.
of ear stoppers
No child is born without a hole in their ears, and the same thing happens to adults due to stoppers from a wound or something stuck inside the ear. Sometimes these stoppers push inward and become hidden deep within the ear, and sometimes they cause a slight protrusion that can be seen.
When the stopper is hidden deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a difficult condition that can lead to various complications. In such cases, one should expose the affected ear to the sun and examine it closely. If you see the membrane bulging outward, then you must treat it in the following manner:
And it should be sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear. If the stopper is made of matter from the body or ear, then use fine pincers to grasp and gently scoop it out until all the matter is removed.
And if the obstruction is complete in the ear, take a razor that is thin and light, heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction which the sick person feels deeply in his hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a plug according to the size of the aperture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it in rose water, and powder with vitriol ground; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is fitting that you pull out the plug and replace it with another plug moistened in cerotum made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is relieved; then cure it until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and a cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distempers.
of paper charcoal
This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
And if they are without skin, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision helps; and many times they return, as long as something remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come in papers from things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; its work is such: cut first if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is a simple thing to know; then open it with tweezers, and pull off the skin. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient; and if the split is large, then tie it up, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will heal it at once and prevent infection.
And if the hives are descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and press them with tweezers; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hives are crushed, wash the area with salted water, and clean the place of that which causes pain until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is woven into papers above, and this happens more to children than to no one, and it hurts a lot in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten in their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces afterwards and sleep on it, and their eyelids are moist, which covers the swelling and appearance with exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the healthy person; and then take a .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist skin with a spatular blade, and do not make it any larger than the wound that is made in the healthy vein; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take therefore a piece of cloth and fold it between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press into the fracture so that you do not go all the way to the joint, lest you damage it.
And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the fracture, then push the fracture slightly open until it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the wound, and apply bandages tightly.
And if it has a feverish abscess, treat with cooling poultices until it is healed. And if there is a hot abscess at the site, treat with cooling ointments until it is healed.Et s’il vient au leu aposteme frouid, si met sus emplaustre chaut, et li apper en la voix de l’esguiselle, si doit aler a l’esguiselle jusques qu’il soit sanez.
And if it has a cold abscess, use a hot poultice, and if there is swelling in the throat, let him go to the doctor until it is healed.
When hairs grow from papers, different than their natural state, and they are in a disheveled state, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases, like tears, softness of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by an aqueous medicine as mentioned before the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by means of canes, as I will explain.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the paper at the margin where the hairs are growing, and pass a thread through the paper from top to bottom, and turn it over to the razor; then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, starting from the great tear duct up to the small one; then remove the thread, place a small tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure according to the amount you want to raise the divided paper.
And if there is a need to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper has become, then make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the great tear duct up to the small one; and let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, then cut it all the way around; then bring together the two lips with a suture of a fine woolen thread through an needle, and wipe away the blood, and apply the surplus threads above the two eyelids to any sticky substance; if not, then do not care about it, then leave the suture and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a suture using dry and constricting substances, because the paper will reattach itself to the wound and the suture is useless (as the ancients say), and this procedure is done without fear.
and if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iij. inches apart according to the shape which is here:
then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with which to sew it up in the middle of the figure, and another thread through the upper lip, and the second thread through the lower, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly and lift off all the skin over which you have signed, as we have recounted, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes at your incision, then soothe it with cerote and soothing ointments.
And sometimes the paper's hair becomes reversed, so you must use what we have said about the incision; but sewing in one and another is more artificial.
The treatment of bones is as follows: fold the parchment and cut it according to what I have said, then make two cannulas as long and as wide as the spatumile; and tie two threads at each end where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what protrudes from the parchment, and extract the two cannulas from the two ends formed; and leave them thus for several days, and the skin which is being extracted will die and harden and slough off as it falls away.
If it is slow to heal and the wound still open, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer grow. This is the form of the two cannulas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:
the procedures are such that you thread a fine needle, and insert a fine silk thread through it; then assemble the threads and tie them together tightly, and let the length of the threads be about the length of a palm; then prepare in the spatumile another fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and keep it exposed to the sun so that the procedure is not hidden, for this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle all the way into the parchment close to the root of the hair, and draw out the hair along with the spatumile until it passes through the parchment, and thread the hair into the spatumile, whether there is one, or two, or three, or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the spatumile and the natural hair.
And if the scrotum is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the scrotum underneath to the very end that you have prepared for it, until the scrotum comes out from the opening above and you see it through the eye; then you will treat the scrotum and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the horse's mane, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it lengthens, and then you will pull it.
from the pustule of the eye
When this disease called 'alacrati' or the pustule comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way to treat the natural pustule that comes from the eye is to split the sudore, and loosen its eyelids, and put in there tents of linen, and ligate it until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than before; but use things that moisten, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altus and seed of flax are cooked, and ointments daquilon melted in one of the oils, and wrap it up with a tent, and treat it so.
And the goal of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and these works which we have said are not effective remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease, which is properly called "axacrati", has natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wound, incision, cautery, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle with a double thread and pierce it into the flesh at the corner of the eye, so that the threads come out on both sides, and then the flesh above the needle is cut open, and the cup is spread out by a spatula.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, turn the paper over, and make 2 slits on each side within the paper; and the edges of the 2 slits on either side of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter with the name "J. grische"; then remove the flesh, according to how much it was cut below, from what followed the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them together with a thread of wool; then treat him with the medicine that softens, and with tents, until he is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is written above; then separate between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that the shape returns to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
Sudden headache
When this soudure occurs in many people in such a way that the paper above is soaked with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore insert the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and use tweezers to hold it, until you pluck out the hairs which are stuck in the spatulum, being careful not to use one that is too sharp or blunt, so that the patient cannot stand the pain of the too-sharp spatulum bleeding the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this blockage, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salt water, and it is relieved with sweet water and a compress; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and apply to the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the fingernail of the eye
Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scurf; and another that is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with iron and pinched as if with tweezers, feels nothing. Both kinds begin at the inner corner of the eye, growing little by little until they cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head down, then opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers and pull it up; then take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, doubling over the tip of the needle a little and pushing it all the way through the nail, then tie the nail to the thread and lift it up, then scrape the skin along the side of the nail from the cuticle to the quick, and clip the remainder at the root of the tear duct until you reach the thin membrane beneath, applying gentle pressure and leaving the natural membrane over the tear duct untouched so that the incision does not affect the flow of tears; and sometimes only the cuticle is lifted, along with the thread, as we have said. Then scrape it all along the thin membrane underneath:
And be careful not to touch the fleshy membrane and break it, nor pierce the tear duct; and after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and a bandage made of linen soaked in vinegar, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
And gently lift the nail, and if you see that it is not lessening and the pus is pressing out, then distil from your mouth into the eye an ointment made of litarge and red copper ore, both ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healed.Et se li ungles sont lons et i poissent de l’oil, si distille en l’oil coliere fait d’un vairain et de litargire et de sel, et les i estoupe jusc’a qu’ils soient ostes; puis rencomence l’altra ovraige selonc ceste meisme forme.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye with great damage, then stop it up with an ointment, and cut away a part but not all of it so that no tear fluid comes; then distil into the eye red ointment made of litarge.And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
of the flesh which grows over the pupil
In some people a red growth sometimes occurs over the pupil, covering it and pressing down on the eyelids, turning them inside out; it resembles a rosebud. The treatment is to have the patient hold his head steady, then open the eye, and cut away all the growth with scissors at an angle suitable for this purpose, and keep up pressure; next cut away the outer growth, working inward little by little until finished, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made as described in the section on incisions for nail growths, using gentle force to remove the growth, just as demonstrated in this chapter.
And when the incision is complete and all the growth removed, apply egg white mixed with red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and over that place a piece of cotton impregnated with egg white, so as to protect against hot abscess; if nothing remains, and the white eye membrane is exposed, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to the treatment until the eye is healed, and thus do for any similar growths.
However, you should also consider the treatment of weak eyes by natural means, and of accidentally injured eyes by iron working; and do not put your hand to any of these treatments until you see that this member is suffering from that treatment.
of the veins of them
There are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they harm the sight and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eyes to see if there is anything else wrong with them apart from the stye; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to tilt his head back, then squeeze the veins gently according to his judgment, and let the openings be subtle twice according to this form:
And let there be two openings by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then squeeze the veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulae, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done that, distill into the eye a mixture of green and red to corrupt what is left of the stye.
If you cannot extract all of this in one hour, then make a poultice from things that soothe the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the abscess is healed, then start again according to the method described above until it is cured; this is the recipe for the ointment:
of the eye fistula
Examine the "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicines that produce heat according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there will be a wound in it where you must split open the abscess and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and darkness, then remove all of it with an instrument like the one in the current figure; it is called a "rough head" and should be made into a small, pointed tool like a file as shown in the present figure.
And put on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption has been removed; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
if the wounds are sewn up and scabs form, and the flesh of the bowels is sewn up, and it remains like this for 40 days, and if it does not heal and there is no sign of improvement, you know that it is healed; if not, then do nothing but pull on the fistula from the opening in the navel according to the following form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and with hot medications, and when it is uncovered take this 3-pointed iron tool, and the staff should be tapered to a point as shown here:
then place it on the bone over the ulcer, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then return to pushing the entire tool as far as it can go until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it with every movement, if they hold their hand over their navel; then restore the site with dry medications as I have instructed you, and when the scabs form and harden, they will see that the matter has gone to the navel; this is much easier for the patient.
from the opening of the eye
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or thinning of the lens, you should bind the patient's eye; then heal it, then place leeches without burning to suck out the blood, then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on top of the eye, and then compress the eye with bandages and cloth; the way of using the cloth is to take soft cloth and double each one in four, then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then compress it from above with a firm bandage, and start again with the leeches to suck without burning; then remove the leeches and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the bandage becomes soft, you should tighten it; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, start again with the poultice and bandages until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven fabric
When disruptions occur in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a resin grain, and it is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the armhole; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place a soft lining on the eye, and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric in a circular pattern around the wound, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and corrects the white moisture and lowers the eyes, and enter in as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healthy.
of the bow of the eye
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is only in the bow that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the treatment is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then hold the head between your hands for a while, and move it so that you see the bow coming up to your eyes; then it should be stopped there, and the light should not descend and be obscured, and the patient should see things as he used to. And if it does not go down under, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not apparent as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatulum and press on the white part of the eye  a little bit through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the white part and the cornea, until the bow comes out; and when it is issued, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled with honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healthy.
of the eye waters
We have already discussed the appearance of the diseases in their division, and what should be done to pierce them; now we must act according to health. It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that he does not see the sun, and press his healthy eye very firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument against the crown by the thickness of a hair at that white part of the eye to the smaller tear duct, then suck the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and you will feel that the almagda reaches the hollow; and the measurement of the path of the almagda should reach the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, then place the instrument where the aqueous humor is, then express it beneath one pathway after another. If the aqueous humor flows out now, the patient will see the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, if the aqueous humor rises again through the second pathway, insert the instrument and when it is stuck and no longer rises, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand slightly back and forth; then put in a little more rose oil, and remove this eye from inside. Then place on top of the eye a compress of cotton or wool moistened with rose oil and egg white, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, place on top of the eye a poultice of ground eggs with an abundance of egg white.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And so pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make .i. slender incision, then pour in alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient .i. dark bed, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. dim place; and he must avoid all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind the eye again until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten this, so that the water rises quickly.
And if there are hot abscesses, you must untie the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face  .i. eyelid to cover some of the eye, and then he should stay in that dark house again. And then leave the house little by little, and return to his usual activities; and know that no disciples should meddle in this case.
And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, for which they suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of alchemy, so that those who do not know them can see them; and they should be of bronze properly:
And let the heads be of the same subtle material, and the rear ones in three angles sharp.
of the character above the nose
Sometimes there are various bumps on the nose; some look like scorpions with feet. And there are some with a blue-colored groove, and some with a light-colored sore. For that which is sore, and not grooved, you must make the patient sit facing the sun; open their nostrils, and spit onto the bumps, and draw them out; then cut what you can sustain with a very sharp, thin knife on one side, as long as you know that the bump is completely removed.
And if any part remains that cannot be covered, open it with a subtle, light instrument, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or abscesses form, then cut it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is dried out and all the rotten flesh is removed, then apply ice or cold water and wine.
If the ears open and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is rotten flesh in the bone above, so the instruments do not work: therefore you must tie a piece of linen thread, about a finger thick, and twist it between your fingers into a rope, with a space of a finger or less between each twist; and place the end of the thread in the ear to the patient's ability, and draw it through the odorant until it comes out through the mouth; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out through the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and move them up and down alternately as you are sucking on the thread. Do this until you know that the thread has drawn out the rotten flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the ear as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all the remaining flesh; and then put a plug of cotton in the ear for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them. This is the instrument used to cleanse the head, through which oils and medicines are dropped into the ear.
And it should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, similar to a candle, and with a handle; and if you want, make a closed vessel, and fill the instrument to cleanse the head; and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the heart above the chest
Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the head; it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should treat it at the beginning, and remove all the pus; then place the cautery or burning medicine on it. If one delays covering it until it has become large, then take care whether it is hard, a bad color, or insensible: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one opens it, great harm comes to the patient. But if the abscess is from a superficial touch, and not from a deep color, and you see that one can cover it all, then open the patient and treat the area of dry and constricting things.
when the head is cut and sewn
Know that when the solution of continuation comes in one of these cartilage work-outs, it profits little, except in some men. Therefore, when this happens to someone, look whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the .ij. lips to a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you should scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the .ij. lips to a stitch, and tighten them, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and burned incense; and put a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and leave it until it comes off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
of abscesses on the lips
At home on the lips there are hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore you should twist the lips, and cut them with a knife on each nodule, and then take them with tweezers and scrape the area after making an incision with ground vitriol, until the blood is stopped; then use vinegar water, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
of gum swelling
Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call 'albus'. You should hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, on the spot. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is the way to treat it.
of the ears, nose, and throat
sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, because corruption has reached the gum, and the teeth smell bad; so you should make the patient hold his head in his hands, and press his lips against your finger, and then pull out the teeth or the growths, as far as they will go; and in this way, you should also deal with blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned; and if what is pulled out at first comes back, do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to pull them out, according to what the work shows you, so that the forceps used to extract teeth have different forms from those used between the teeth; and these forms, together with others, should be prepared for you.
When you are curing a toothache, it is necessary to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because there is no need to hurry. It is a very delicate matter, and one must not be in a hurry to pull it out. Therefore, when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain about the tooth that hurts. Often, the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe it is in the healthy tooth, and they have the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not go away because of this as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these patients. And when you are quite certain about the tooth that hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then move it with your fingers or with a pair of fine tweezers until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers tightly in place. Let the head of the patient be between your knees and held firm so that it does not move.
Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it won't come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side lightly, then move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with cotton, where the rottenness is; then hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break when pulled; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often causes greater pain for the patient due to the root remaining. And beware of doing as ignorant healers do, who, in their haste and arrogance, sometimes break the jaw, without heeding what we have told them; they sometimes bring about serious illness through the holes left by the roots, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. After pulling out the tooth, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of instruments, by which the teeth are pulled out first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And they should be made of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold the gums.
from the root of teeth When the root remains while pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days, until the gums are softened. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a bird's beak; they should be made inside like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the skin all around the root and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, of which this is the shape:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out with this, that is good; if not, then use all of the instruments, whose shapes come next:
And one uses this instrument which has .ij. tongs, of which this is the shape:
and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
And let this instrument be sturdy enough that it does not break, and know that many dental instruments exist; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtlety finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases for which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break in the bone or in other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, that I have told you, and helps with gestures; here is the form: And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is unattractive, especially in virginal women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if it is airy with the tooth, then take this instrument, of which here is the form, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the end:
And the gum recedes a little every day because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed, then file it with a file like this is the shape:
and is also like the file that needles are made with; and file the tooth a little every day slightly, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with any rasor, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file the roughness so that it is even and does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front teeth loosen, either by a blow or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on anything he eats without them coming loose, and you have treated them with binding medicines without success; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you wish to direct the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice between two healthy teeth, then put the wire between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the bleeding part; then start again at the point where you began, straining your hand gently so that it does not move. Then cut the wire with pliers and assemble the ends, and tie them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth so that it does not cut the tongue. Then leave it as tightly as possible, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then tighten it with another wire. It will stay in place and serve its purpose, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the directing of two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is placed back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should meddle with this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is held fast as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the line of the tongue
Sometimes this line comes from under the tongue, either by nature from birth or by accident from a wound; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and place his head in your lap, and loosen the tongue; then cover the nervous line from the side, so that the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is caused by a wound, insert the nail and cover the line on the side; and be careful that the split is not too deep, because of the artery that lies underneath. And when you have finished, wet the area with rose water or cold water, then place a tent made of linen under the tongue; and tie the patient's mouth every night so that it does not heal. And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol; and if the blood stops, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is healed.
And if you see it is black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre. And if it is inclining towards blenorrhea, and there is moisture, insert the nail, and open it with a subtle spatumile, and release it from one side and the other; and if the bleeding occurs while you are doing this, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you draw out everything. Then wet the area with rose water and celery water, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses in the throat
There are sometimes growths in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, be aware: if the abscess is firm and small, with a dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and has a thick root, do not touch it with iron to prevent bleeding; let it bleed until it is dry, then you can pierce it or it will burst on its own. If it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for piercing, but first check that the abscess is calm and soothed. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head tilted back, his mouth open, and his tongue pressed down by a servant holding his hands between the patient's jaws; this will expose the tonsil, which resembles a small knife made of silver or brass:
Having pressed the tongue down with this instrument, you will see the tonsil. Take a pair of forceps and grab the abscess, then pull it out from the tonsil, drawing any threads of membrane along with it. Then cover the instrument again to maintain its shape, for it is designed like a hook; the tip curves upward and the ends curve downward, and they are very sharp. It is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use a pair of tweezers that are shaped like it.
And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water, or scoops of pomegranates that have been cooked, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils arise in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep in her throat, that is to say, one small abscess; and she had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two more days. And the abscess had risen so high that it had pushed out two bumps from the two openings of the nose. I hurried therefore, and inserted an instrument into one opening, then drew out a large amount of pus; then I made another incision in the other opening of the nose, and cleared her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the instrument into the abscess, and cut out a portion, and only a little blood came out; and thus the opening of the throat of the woman was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut the abscess for a long time; and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus, it did not grow any more. And I left these parts, and she was to continue the treatment herself.
of the liver
When the eye descends to the socket and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called an "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the wound of the aperture is soothed, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red, or light brown, or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, in its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it downward, and cut to a depth of one-third or half the length of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. You should not cut deeper than the natural limit, for if you do, it causes grief in speech and voice. After the incision, use what we said about the incision on the two almonds, and continue the treatment until it is healed. And if the patient fears having their eye cut, then you should use an agent to numb the sensation of pain before cauterizing. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient places his head on your lap, and you press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply quicksilver, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; then use the implement made for this instrument, which has this shape:
And it has a handle at the top where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon; and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye, and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine do not run down into the throat and lungs; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it harden and the burning sensation of the medicine subside. Then take some cotton, wrap it around an instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument wrapped in cotton into the canal above, so that the cotton rests on the eye; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to apply the cautery again, do so, then wash the area around the medicine with cool water, and treat the wound with gargarisms until it heals.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus, hyssop, marjoram, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and mix some of them in a pot with honey, and boil it; the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and inside the pot there is an instrument shaped like this: And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, he begins again frequently, until the eye dries up, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things happen there; and do not do it except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside it an egg-shell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell does not allow the vapor to weigh down the mouth, and it is a good and safe remedy together.
Many times a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; so you must draw out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not become apparent to you and remains stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will catch on, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and its tip should be lifted up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, or it will fold over, nor push the os inside; and move it around so that the patient swallows the instrument, in order that it can dislodge the object; then he swallows it down, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
from the mucus of the throat
Sometimes the mucus is treated with medicine as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient at the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the mucus, then pull it out with a small hook, or with tiny tweezers suitable for this. And if this doesn't work, take a sheep's horn, and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the horn, and do this often. And if the patient turns pale all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the mucus feels the water, it will shrink.
And if it does not shrink as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for the fumigation of the larynx; do this many times, because it will certainly work. And the method of the fumigation is to put burning coals in a pot, and cover it with a perforated lid, and place the instrument in the hole; then blow your fumigation into the pot, and have the patient put the tip of the horn in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the mucus; and the mucus will shrink immediately. And if it does not shrink, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient fast, and eat salty and dry things, and drink no water; and then he will certainly pass it.
And the shape of the instrument used to pull out the mucus is, when you can see it, like curved tweezers that can enter the throat; and it has the shape of a bird's beak, and is coated with limestone, so that what it grabs cannot escape; and here is its shape:
the chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as the recollections which come to us here and there in this book show, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two main types, one depending on its appearance, and the other on its location in the body. Thus, an abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and a soft-tissue abscess is different from one which occurs in a joint, and each type must be treated differently.
And one must not lance an abscess until the boil is mature according to its nature; and there are some which one must lance when they are crusty, and do not heal by themselves according to their nature, like abscesses which come in joints. For when an abscess comes in a joint, and you leave it as long as it is purulent around the edge, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will be damaged, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and you delay lancing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal limb; but if it is near the fundament, one should lance it so that it matures; and one must not lance a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for one which is near the fundament, lest it become impacted within and grow longer, and a fistula develops; and it will not heal for a long time.
And one must know the time for lancing an abscess which is mature according to its nature, and that is when the pain has subsided, and there is a reduction in fever, and lessening of pain and redness, and relaxation and softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and one should lance it where it is most dependant, and where there is an opening for pus to escape; and the lancing should be done from the long side of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
In these cases, treat according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave it intact until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it before that, the body from which the venom comes will be elongated, and it will be filled with much filth; and the lips and depths of it may harden. And for some abscesses, one should cut according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. One should treat small abscesses with small openings, and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess. For some abscesses, one should slice off the top and cover it; when it has become like a drape, and is deadened, one should do as one does with blisters. Some are split into three angles, and some are covered like the leaf of a myrtle, like abscesses of the joints. And for some, one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced directly. And when an abscess is large and has drawn a lot of pus, if you do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but some in one day, then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this repeatedly from great to small, until all the pus comes out. The same is true if the patient is very weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the pus shoots out with such force that it may kill the patient, and you would not know it. Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter; when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, treat it with tents made of linen or old cotton. If it is a large abscess with many openings, put a tent into each one so that they touch each other. If you have sliced off part of the skin and cut around it, fill it with old cotton or raw linen cloth without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, treat it with cold water and ash, and wet a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the location of the abscess is very nervous, then place wet tents and cloths moistened with warm wine and oil over it; and if it is summer, and the location is fleshy, then place wet cloths moistened with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said. Then dislodge the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.Et se il adonques ne percoit point li pus, et il est gros et froit, si covient que tu traies la bowe derechief tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure d’oignement ou d’aisil et de viez oile dou frotier, si com il covient.  Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est gros et chaud, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie, et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est petit et froit, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est petit et chaud, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
And now we must discuss generally about treating abscesses: I have already told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and now see the chapter.
of sores
Now let's talk about how to treat abscesses that come from the head; they are similar to those found on chickens, and there are many variations. Some are fatty and have a soft texture like poultry, while others are hard and stony, and there is no cause for concern if the artery doesn't react. The treatment for these varies depending on the individual case. You must use an instrument called an "entromissoire" to examine the content of the abscess; if it contains moisture, you should lance it from the side; otherwise, if it's stony, you should cut it out. After removing the moisture, you should scorch the skin to prevent any remaining moisture from coming back; it will return if you don't do this. Then, apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or water and salt if the ointment is unavailable, and leave it overnight. The next day, reapply the cotton, and continue doing this until the wound is healed. If the abscess contains a fatty nodule, lance it from the side; squeeze it from all sides and remove the entire core; if the artery reacts, follow the instructions I gave earlier. Treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing.
The incision on a stony abscess is easier if there is less blood. In some cases, I found abscesses on the heads of elderly women that were like hard, rough, white stones, and couldn't be broken; if one tried to pierce them, it would have caused as much damage as a stone. The openings for these types of abscesses should be made as low as possible so that the pus can drain out; then treat them as necessary.
of scrofula
Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are numerous, and some are joined together. Each scrofula is properly located within its coat, just as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulae. There are some which contain moisture, and others that refuse to yield to treatment. If you see one in a good condition for cauterization, and it resembles the color of the body, and is flat on each side and not raised towards the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cover it from above, and cut into each part, and the two lips of the heart are joined together, if you need to, as we have said in the case of abscesses of the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve or the vein, and do not allow the spatula to slip and cut, so that the hand does not escape, and do not go too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein and it does not allow you to work, then put vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and tie it up; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, until you finish it; then seek out any small scrofulae that remain, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut into that scrofula at its root, but ligate it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut away the whole scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now so that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must attend to covering its root, pulling it outward, and sewing it as we have said. For those scrofulas which hold a superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as that previously described, hanging a tent with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, treat it with an ointment enfolding charcoal until it heals.
of squint.
The ancients wrote and spoke of throat-slitting; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", be cut; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of life due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four circles, or a small split across the middle, between two circles, or according to the amount of the split in the larynx; not in the cartilage.
And these places are suitable for the split of the epiglottis, that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then split the larynx until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the larynx, as we have said;
and is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the finger that jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leaves the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the neck, and stitch it up all the way to the cartilage without leaving a gap; then administer remedies that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged to be at death's door and the shortage of breath. Therefore, grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young girl take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting some of the vocal cords in her larynx;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not flowed out any further than the throat, and the blood vessels were intact.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and healed her so that she recovered.
and had not the lady fainted from the pain, and returned after to her senses;
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it is very common in women;
and it has two causes: natural and accidental; where nature has no cause.
And the accidental is in two ways: one similar to a tumor, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery. And there is fear in it, and one should not operate with force except on the small one, and test and examine throughout the entire opening. If you find it as a tumor, and it cannot be moved at all, cut it like one cuts a tumor, and treat it throughout its growth, if there is any. and seek treatment immediately, and heal it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
from us
There are many ways of us, all of which I will describe:
and now I must tell you about the difference between a wound and an outbreak.
I say that a discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the boil has burst and completed its course; then the fever and heat will cease.
With a boil there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large.
And they are according to their appearances, some are greasy, some moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
When you come to the treatment of a boil, you must first test and examine it with an instrument called a "probes", according to what its shape indicates in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press on the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers, until you know that the instrument has pierced through to the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the instrument, and take care that nothing leaks out.
If the pus runs clear, whatever its colour, they should proceed as I have said for other abscesses.
And if no pus comes out after the instrument is inserted, know that it is a dry abscess, so they should cross it with the instrument and take it with tweezers, and lightly scorch each part, and guard the coat or shirt that the patient wears to make sure it is clean.
and if you cannot draw it out intact, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
and if some remains and the wound does not trouble you, then treat the wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound tightly, and apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus.
and if the vein is pulsating, or any other vein that you are hastening, use vitriol and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to the cupping as before.
Here are the forms of the cutting instruments, and they are in 3 ways: large, medium, and small; and there are 4 squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are 3 kinds of ways to use them: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses with fistulas.
They are also like the needles that they use to sew sorcerers, and they are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are better than those that are blackened with lead for surrounding abscesses with fistulas.
They are in 3 ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the holes.
The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some warts have two curves in three ways.
and some warts have three curves and are also in three ways; and some warts have two curves and are only in one way, and some warts have one curve and are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The tips of these which are used for cutting are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve;
and these introducers are wrapped in pieces of cloth so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs and arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, similar to a piece of wood, according to this form, with which blood is staunched:
and it is sometimes put in the place that heals by copious bleeding of the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:
At times, men's breasts swell when they become corrupt, so much so that they look like women's breasts.
They remain ugly and swollen; anyone who wants to treat them should follow this method from line b to g: then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with a poultice of warm honey, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal;
and if the breast sags and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then split it into two along a similar line; with the larger line containing the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g; then cut the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and use what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely closed because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton dipped in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpit
These abscesses that come from under the armpit are like hard scrofula nodules, some of which contain pus and moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been discharged, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is deep, then apply cautery as we have said before.
of bleeding from an artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn shut, there often occur abscesses and swelling of the vein;
and if one knows it is caused by the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will sense a pull; and when it is in the vein, there will be a visible pulsation;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is below the armpits and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it is large. Therefore, one should avoid the cure with iron, and if it is on the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above.
Therefore, one should avoid the cure with iron, and if it is on the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above. Then open the incision with knives, and carefully cut the artery away from the veins, until it is fully exposed;
take a needle and insert it under the eye, piercing all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread about half an inch, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
then probe the area between the two ligatures with an introducer until blood emerges and the abscess is relieved;
then administer the treatment that causes bleeding, until the ligature falls off; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can to all the skin, then insert the needle under the area that you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and thread .i. double thread through it, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, to one of the two parts with the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will come undone, then tie another needle to all of the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in .iiij. directions;
then lance the abscess so that the pus flows out, then lance the pus from the chest and leave what is attached.
then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat the wound with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
As well as abscesses coming in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often in shoulders and elbows and all joints where there are articulations, and it is a deep abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain.
And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body, but under the skin.
And it is motionless in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or sideways or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron; for there might be contraction.
And that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a plaster. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze at its base;
and if it is large, then open it with an incision and scrape away at the flesh, then pull out the bone and stitch up the wound until it is healed.
large boils hanging Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called 'fungus' due to its resemblance to ears, with fine hair and large lumps; there are both small and very large ones;
I saw one man who had two on his stomach that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white with thin roots and split open, and moisture flowed from them.
I cut them open and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces; their appearance in the incision is such that you should examine whether the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root.
If the cut is large, and the patient has a strong pulse, then you must act quickly with the fire cautery, because when cutting there is often excessive bleeding that cannot be stopped until cauterized.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision by the knife, then take a well-prepared thread, tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then restrain it, and do not stop squeezing the hair Follicle until it pops out of the joint, and squeeze through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, it is afraid to pop them out because of the belly, but you can certainly squeeze out half of them.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be careful not to squeeze the follicle that is of a pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.
when the boil pops
If the appearance of the hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in syphilis, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned earlier, or from flatulence;
And if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with various exits. And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it rises, and then returns, and sometimes it is serous, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and it is fixed according to a quantity;
And if it is due to flatulence, then it is relieved by the touch, and the operations are such that you should look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or flatulence. You should let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bladder, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and extend it straight, then sign all around the navel; then command him to sit up quickly between your hands, then go around the area you have marked all around the joint. then cut through the top half of the abscess to the bottom at the large hook;
then cut through the top half of the abscess extended over the string, and push your index finger in, and grasp the intestine; If you find it caught in the lining, free it and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you find an obstruction, they cut it at the obstacle and cut away the excess;
And if the artery or vein causes a blockage, then go around it and return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and pierce the two needles through what you have done in a cross shape.
Then squeeze the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see any pus, remove the needles and let it drain until it is clean, and cut away the dead flesh. where you cut it when it is subtle and delicate, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said.
where you cut it when it is subtle and delicate, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as appropriate and close it up.
from a ulcer
We have discussed the types of ulcers and how to treat them with medicine, as well as the importance of cauterization with iron. Now, let us speak of the ulceration that occurs in the mouth, and the great caution that must be taken in its treatment. The ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be reached, such as in the breast or armpit, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in its early stages. However, once it becomes large and old, one must not touch it, for I have never seen anyone heal from this.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then let him bleed if he has manifest fullness, then open the disease in a suitable place to perform the operation; then cut your fingernails or calluses, and the skin all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel faint, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
of dropsy We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each type, and the treatment using medicine, and that which is treated with iron. Now we will discuss only briefly: and one should not use iron in these two types of dropsy: tympany and hydrops, for they are fatal conditions. So, when treating this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, if the treatment doesn't help and the patient is either very weak or has other illnesses besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar conditions, then one should not use iron, as there is a risk of harm. But if the patient is strong and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then one should proceed as follows: Take the patient's right hand in your hands, and the minister presses the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorny spatulas according to this form: And it should be .ij. Parts with a point, and yet not so intruding that it can reach the intestines when it is pushed in, and it cannot bleed;
Then look to see if the hydropsy is directed towards the intestines: you should split under the armpit 3 times on the right side of the chest; and if the hydropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your split should be on the left side of the chest 3 times; and if it's due to the disease of the lung, then it should be on the right side, and you must not let the patient lie on the split so that the fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
Then pierce the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and hold your hand on all the spatulas between the skin and the syphac as if you were skinning to the amount of a fingernail or in between; then pierce the syphac until the spatulas reach the desired location, which is where the water is, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which the shape comes: And it is similar to a subtle silver rod, made of lightweight bronze or brass, with 1 small hole on the bottom part; and on one side, there are 3 holes; and 2 on the other, and 1 on the other; and the head is tailored like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes cut the pen:
at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it will now descend upon the instrument; empty it therefore by half or by a third part, for if you empty more than it is convenient in that hour, by chance the patient may die due to the loss of blood, or he may fall unconscious, or he may approach death;
but empty according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the ailment indicate, and his pulses; then bring out the instrument and retain the water, and it is now retained by the plug that stops the orifice that is above the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then bring out the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and bring out a small amount of water.
do this any day, and keep from following until it remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a lot of water, then the cure is burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and by dying from drinking; and the cure is desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterizing on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. Then one must pierce it immediately with a very fine spatumile according to this form: then put into the opening a very thin plug of lead, and tie it and leave it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and he will urinate, and then put the plug back in; and perhaps one is not needed at all, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose foreskin is tight, if they are treated with a clot of blood, as we have said, will loosen. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are infected, for some are born with the foreskin at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the tip and glans of the penis are cut to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin splits in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop the blood flow with something that stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
of pustules on the penis Many times, there are boils on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are both benign and malignant ones; so you must cut them to a depth of one-eighth inch, then scrape and clean all of them, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment over them; then cure with thin ointment until it heals. And if the ulcer is malignant, with a putrid color and stench, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have burned it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, then cure the one outside. For when you cure them both together, then the head of the penis is not assured from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its shaft and in the scrotum; so you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and poppies, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries have two purposes together: that is, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you must insert into the shaft of the penis a lead tube, and the patient should urinate through it. And when there is swelling at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, either due to a wound or an abscess, then you must excise it with an instrument until the ligature is released and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
and if it is a painful thing to talk about, then you must excise it with a spatulum at the head of the penis and the skin; then cut quickly between two, and put there a very thin linen cloth soaked in cold water so that it does not swell again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not dislocation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest wound for their safety.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who circumcised around the glans, and with force, and all over the foreskin; so the head would go out because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below.
Then they bandage it, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done from below, the joint of the member is not set right; and in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes, and they ruin the work, and many times they grow thus so that they do not need purification and I want it.
Of the purification which is done with force throughout all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in a circle all around the tendon; but let the thread be well tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the wand, and then let him pull it in all the ways he can. Then hold the wand between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then press your hand to the wand and breathe on the wound, and draw it upwards until the head of the wand is in; then purify it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wounded area with a double thread, then tie it again at another spot lower down; and hold it with one hand by the second ligature at the wrist and the index finger, and pull the chief of the wand;
Then hold the wand between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then press your hand to the wand and breathe on the wound, and draw it upwards until the head of the wand is in; then purify it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wounded area with a double thread, then tie it again at another spot lower down; and hold it with one hand by the second ligature at the wrist and the index finger, and pull the chief of the wand; let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the miasma; and apply powder on top of the powder, on .i. bandage glued with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two cheeks should be thin and sharp, and the ears as big as the hands, equally:
the error of purification is when the wound within bleeds; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the pus makes an abscess; and the scabs likewise, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are soothed and the scabs lightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and be careful of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Therefore treat the site of sudden injuries with a poultice, as we have said in the treatise on poultices, and if it oozes pus excessively, do not wipe it away, but let it flow; then treat it as we have said until it heals.
from retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or a tumor, or a growth, or similar conditions, which we have discussed in the previous chapter.
And if the urine is blocked, and you see that the obstruction is caused by a stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees, and place his feet on his back, and stretch his abdomen from above the back, and constrict the area above the navel; this will force the neck of the bladder to express the stone upwards, causing the urine to flow.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird; and let the cane be a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.
And the way to cause the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the tip a little ball of wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and insert it just to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and let the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen; then fill the syringe all the way to the bladder, and the patient will feel it go up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order except that the leader where it goes is wrong; then pull out the thread with the wool, and let the urine flow along the wool, then withdraw it, and let the urine flow;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be relieved.
of bladder diseases
When burns or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or when pus gathers there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do this to all of the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
It is sealed and has 3 openings: 2 on one side and 1 on the other, as you see; and the tube through which the medicine flows must be such that it blocks the penis without any addition, so that one can draw out moisture and push in when necessary;
and when you see your medicines dripping into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw as if it were a bowstring; then release the bowstring quickly, and the moisture will enter the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it;
and this is the shape of the subtle catheter by which one cathesizes the bladder: it is thus:
It is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher up; and below there are two small lips; then take a bladder of a lamb and put in it the moisture with which you intend to cathesize the bladder, then tie the bladder between the two lips formed of a good double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the penis, then draw your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered comfortably, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and form it into a circle, then pierce it all around; then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put inside what you intend to use of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stones
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction along with medications; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and many of these stones have hard cores; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through an enema, in order to draw out any feces which might be obstructing the intestines and preventing the stone from being passed.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and shake him from side to side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then make him sit in your lap with his hands under his thighs, so that his bladder is completely tilted downward; then examine and feel around inside him:
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then quickly cut into the stone. And if it does not move when touched, then wet your left index finger with oil, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into its opening, and push against the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it back to the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger, and push it out where you want to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and for the patient to extend their testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
And cut between the testicles and anus, not in the middle but along the left side; and let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers pressed against the anus, and let the incision be across, so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the pressure on the fingers at the anus may cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there is kind of stone that has angles and edges, and another that is round like a grape, from which the passage is easier.
For those with angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it won't hold, you must stretch it using pincers which are like a file at the end, to extract the stone so that it doesn't slip out; or insert a very thin instrument underneath the stone; and if you cannot grab it thus, then widen the opening a little, and if the blood flows, stop it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, insert the largest into the neck of the bladder first, then pull it up, and the smaller ones after, if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it and make a larger incision. For two things can happen to the patient: he may die, or the urine will flow out through the wound where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out in pieces with pincers.
And when you have finished, wash the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and tie it up, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bandage the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandages until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is held back by this, which is known in such a way that without a doubt with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains there, then the bladder will be corroded and burst.
Then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat him, that you tie his two thighs, and apply remedies on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then he is treated in this way, that you cut him many times with this treatment, or one excuses the cutting because of this treatment. I have already proven this.Et li cure qui est plus a grant sallut, si covient le tailler au plus tost que tu puos, car il ne puet demorer, et li urine ne puet issir; et tant qu’il est taille, il est en grant dolor, mais apres qu’il est taillé, il se sent aleseer.
And the treatment which is more beneficial to health, then one must cut it as soon as possible, for it cannot stay, and the urine cannot pass; and while it is being cut, he feels great pain, but after it is cut, he feels relief.Take a 1-inch iron rod according to this shape with 3 angles fixed in a tongs:
then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the probe into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and push the probe back into your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the shaft. Then it is broken at once, and flies out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
of stones in women
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is prohibited by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
The third way is that one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of a man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved.
And if you need to, get a female assistant who is very knowledgeable, and gently probe with it, and if you don't find anything, don't worry. Use a very thin probe; and show her a good example of a woman's anatomy, or a woman who knows some of the art, and tell her to do what you instruct from your examination of the stone;
and check very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and he should instruct her to push her left hand firmly against her bladder.
If she finds it, she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder to the root, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive; and feel the stone in that part; and do not push the finger over or under the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
then pour the wine into the wound at the waist, feel the stone and see if it is sharp enough to cut through the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many kinds of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some with horns. Know their likenesses in order to know how they will come out.
And if the wine does not work, then apply powdered vitriol and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task and have ready the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work.
And if the bleeding does not stop and it is an artery that is cut, then apply the powder to the wound and constrict it with bandages and linen, and do not re-open the wound, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, for fear of killing the patient; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task and have the stone extracted.
of a fleshy hernia
A watery hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located below the membrane of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called 'pus', and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes it to be another egg; and this occurs between the white pus that we mentioned earlier.
And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the testicles, causing this material to accumulate and spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture takes on many colors: sometimes it is yellow, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and so on.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syphon which we have mentioned, then the abscesses are open, that is, as long as the shape of an egg, and does not show the testicles, for there is moisture all around.
And if he has moisture in the scrotum, then the abscesses are open with part of an egg, and because of this they think it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphon, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe throughout the entire scrotum, as the form is described above. According to this then, what comes after the scrotum, judge what is inside.
According to this then, what comes after the scrotum, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with fire, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed underneath him;
then he sits on his left side and instructs the attendant to sit on his right, and extends the arm to one of the two ribs near the heart;
then take the lit spatule and cut through the skin of the chest between the ribs, all the way to the white skin, cutting it carefully according to his strength;
then pierce the plain water through the skin with a large hole, and extract all the water, then put in your fingers, and let the skin rise above; and do not touch the heart of the chest, but only the skin; cut it all around carefully, the costlet of him subtilely, if you do not cut it bleeding well, then the water will return;
and if the wound jumped out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work with the syringe; then bring together the two lips of the wound with a single stitch, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut into the vein at the suspension, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is divided into two parts, know that these are two branches; so cut into the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood and place soft lamb's wool in oil on the wound.
and place another piece of soft lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil on the wound, and place it over both parts of the vein, and put over that double folds of cloth, and tie it all together with a ligature in this shape:
Take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this appearance, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the pieces be tied around the anus up to the back, and the other at the perineum; and the other two ends on the two thighs, and tie all the rest in a knot at the loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this ramification of cautery is used in place of an iron incision, and it is necessary to press a thin cautery knife gently against the skin, and heat it as we have said, so that the white membrane containing the water is exposed;
Take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that membrane gently, and burn it with this fine hot cautery:
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have extracted everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the yolk; and know that this method is much safer; and we also warn of bleeding, and of damage from cutting.
and if nothing contradicts you, then treat the abscess, or bleeding, or anything else that contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horrible nature, then administer a puncturing, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the water is gone,
let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom part all the way to the spleen, and insert the puncturing tool deeply into the body; and make the holes wide enough so that all the fluid can flow out;
then put cotton on the wound, and bandage it, and leave it to drain the remaining fluid, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white membrane does not let the water out at the mouth of the wound, then you should put in it a pipe or instrument with which one treats the water in the hydrops, whose form is described above; and enlarge the wound a little, and let the water come out, and it will be gathered again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will pass his days.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the dissection of this nerve there is fear in many dispositions, because of which I believe it is better to leave it untouched:
and I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and especially in the groin; and this is through a great variety of cases.
This is due to an excess of bitterness and redness caused by a blow, which is spread in the groin, or from a punch;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not subside, and it is a painful and serious abscess;
and sometimes there are dark green and purulent abscesses, with a bluish color, and at times they come from a burst artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
When it is due to a vein, it is detected by the hot feeling of an abscess when you press it with your fingers. You must not touch it.
Those who have swelling in their veins are detected by their appearance when pressed with the fingers,
and can make an incision on this appearance, and on other similar ones, and you should cut the heart of the testicles, then the yolk will rise upwards and the white part will be expelled from all sides of the egg.
If the eggs are already cooked with these new eggs, then you must break the egg and cut it.
And if there is air in the yolk, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension and cut it smoothly.
And if the origin of the yolk is at the back, then you must cut it completely and extract the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is done, employ the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the testicle abscess
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a .i. bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient feels great pain when he walks;
and the treatment for this illness is just as fearful as the one before.
And yet we will tell you about its cure according to what the ancients did.
You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspension band around his testicles with your hands, and tightly twist all the veins that are near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them firmly;
then cut with a spatula broadly through the vessels, so that they are exposed.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the screw came in, and ties it again at the other end; then he cuts them evenly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as with the others or with a bandage, so that no blood vessels are cut that nourish one of the testicles;
for through this there is no harm, and if blood vessels come from all sides, then the testicles should be drawn away from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment through cutting the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rot of the scrotum The causes of this disease are through the cut that comes from syphilis, or the swelling on the belly in the part of the intestines, which cause the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
and this opening is from syphilis or the swelling of it, and these two ways of the flow come from many causes: from a blow, or jumping, or straining, or lifting a heavy load, and by similar things.
And the signs that it is from the swelling of syphilis are that it happens slowly over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear various, under the skin close by, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the syphilis.
And sometimes the stones descend with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain from it.
And the way to do this treatment is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it; then let him be bent forward over his neck between your hands, and press his thighs.
then the chest is pressed down and all the skin of the testicles from above is cut away then insert hooks into the loins according to what you need in order to open the wound, and it should be such that the bile can come out.
then scrape off the scrotum skin that is under the testicle skin, until the white, hard scrotum is uncovered all around.
then put your index finger in the one that follows the anus, in what is between the white membrane which is under the egg's shell, and between the second membrane
and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second membrane; and then move your right hand inside the anus, and hold the white membrane upwards in your left hand, and lift the egg away from all the membrane towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is air behind the bowel;
and feel with your fingers if there is any intestinal wrapper or hard white membrane, and if you find anything, then put it back into the belly underneath;
take a needle with .i. large thread made of .x. threads, and insert it into the rear part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .iiij. threads; then tie them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the scrotum, of which we have spoken and is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly in a figure-eight shape, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, so that no abscess can form there; and cut the ligature according to the first long ligature in 2 parts of that one, and after those 2 ligatures, leave the scrotum which is under the heart of the testicles with the large part of a finger;
and then the other according to the roundness that the eye carries; then press in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of blood flow.
For it happens many times, and they leave the ligature in place until it falls off; and if it takes a long time to fall off, then use warm water, and apply what we have said until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as the ramifice which is together with the vein, in such a way that you ligature the vessels, after cutting it above gently from below;
then press on it, and open the abscess of whoever is affected, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and the orifice opens; but no intestines protrude through it, and if they do, it is very little, and it can be repaired at any time;
but if he stays too long in this condition, the hernia grows, until the intestines protrude;
and this happens because of the extension of the hernia, as we have said, for it is extended, then it becomes soft and swollen, and the orifice opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you press the site of the fracture gently with the broad end of a spoon according to the quantity of three eggs;
then pull out the pus sac which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible spot of the pus sac;
and press deeply into the abdomen, then tie off the two visible spots of the pus sac on the head of the thread, and tie one and then the other;
then pull the head of the vein, and do not cover it with syrup or extend the wound or anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of a rupture of the intestines;
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you bandage the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in bleeding, and cautery is more beneficial and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the testicles inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then sew the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you see, close the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it heals, and cut the thread.
of chastisement
Do you know that chastisement is prohibited by our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the surgeon knows how to respond when asked, and knows how to treat it; and the other is because we often need to use chastisement on certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and horses. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. With the method of attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and dangling; then squeeze them in your hand until they are back in place and you no longer feel them. For the method of cutting: tie the animal down, and cut the skin of the scrotum with your left hand, then cut each testicle open at the middle, once you have well-scalded them; and leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; this method of chastisement is better than the one done by attraction, because with attraction, something from the testicles might remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
of hermaphrodites
There are two kinds of hermaphrodites: one is male, but between their legs it is open like a woman's vagina, with pubic hair, and sometimes they even ejaculate.  The other is female, with a penis on the scrotum, and both testicles and ovaries.  In the first kind, you treat them like any other wound; in the second kind, those who urinate through the skin of their scrotum cannot be cured.
of the tetter
Tetter is a skin disease that causes ugly sores on the body; some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. You must cut away the excess skin of the tetter with your hand or fingernails, but not too deeply so that bleeding occurs, and then cure the sore with another sore until it is healed. There is also a sore that arises in the mouth, which looks like a cow's udder, and they call it the "cow disease". You must cut this as you would the tetter, and then cure it once it is healed.
of erratics
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins from which blood flows freely, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in a previous section. I said that both hemorrhoids and thrombosed hemorrhoids, when they are fully formed inside the anus, and do not respond to treatment with medication, can only be cured by surgery using iron instruments. Those that can be felt at the entrance of the anus can be treated. Therefore, one should place the patient in a cool room, then cut off the hemorrhoids with tweezers, and cauterize their roots with a mixture of powdered astringent medications such as acacia and dragon's blood incense, and similar substances; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, and then submerge her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction made from sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar substances. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to her back. If this stops the bleeding, that is good. If not, apply leeches to the back and breasts without using iron instruments; then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or aglet leaf juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals. The one called 'albathir' is red and resembles a hard lump, so it should be treated as I have described for thrombosed hemorrhoids; then cure it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
There are many types of abscesses that can form in the anus, including sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as several others that I have described in a previous section. Therefore, I will now describe in this treatise the hot abscess that forms in the anus, which is not the same as the one that occurs in the bowels. If you want to know how to use the instrument, examine whether the abscess is suppurating at the beginning of its formation, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it turns red when you look at it. Then, do not rush to pierce it, but let the pain subside first; then, have the patient sit on a chair with two small seats for leaning, one against the back and one against the legs, and let the buttocks be spread apart, and place the arms under the knees, and tie them securely with a good rope. Then, suck the orifice towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the anus, so that you can determine the depth of the anus and ensure that the instrument does not go in too deep and harm the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloth so that it is not uncomfortable, and place the tip of the instrument inside, and then draw it out. When the abscess breaks open and the bowels are released, apply moist tents soaked in rose oil or green oil to the wound, pushing the tent into the anus and placing linen soaked in water or malva flowers over the anus and around the perineum. Then treat the wound with ointment for two days, and then raise the anus and the wound using a clyster of water and honey, and then water infused with lily roots and aristolochia. Return to treating the wound with ointment. If the wound has drained inside the anus, refrain from using heat, but treat it as we have described earlier.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of childbirth and its signs; when you see a woman breathing quickly and desiring to smell flowers, then hasten the child's exit; then you can tell that this childbirth follows nature, with the placenta emerging after the child, and the mother's excess fluids are expelled through proper cleansing; anything different is not natural. Sometimes the baby emerges feet first, or emerges from the body, arms, or abdomen, and sometimes it gets twisted onto its neck or other unnatural positions. The midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you how to assist in all situations.
If the baby emerges head-first through a natural birth canal, and the mother gives birth painfully with weak contractions, then seat her on a stool or have other women support her. Boil a mixture of oil and fenugreek, and then use a small spatula (as described below) to gently apply it: and split the placenta, and press her fingernails into her until the moisture that is within flows out; and squeeze her belly so that the baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, then cleanse the woman with a poultice of ground fenugreek mixed with sisament oil; then make her sneeze and cough from the spice mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the baby will emerge. And if both hands come out, then gently pull them back in little by little; and if they can't go in, then sit the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and lean her forward so she is not bent over; and if the hands still can't go in, and the baby dies, then grasp the hands at the knuckles as described before, and pull out the child, and proceed likewise.
of the birth of a child on its feet When the child is born standing, it should be turned over; and then turn him slowly and gently until he is straight;
then grab one of his feet and stretch it out slowly.
When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to grab hold, and make it sneeze from its condition; if it jumps out, God willing.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then move it little by little, until it is in its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of sarsaparilla, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and smear this ointment, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump now. of the child's delivery onto his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little.
of the infant's exit, which should be about one hand wide One must try to bring back the hand: if one cannot, then have the woman stand up and walk;
if she can't walk, then have her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then administer the medicine that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a seat, then study to bring the hand back; and turn the child according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command her to press until the baby comes out.
from the child's exit onto its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back I must twist her hand, then turn it little by little, and hold it gently;
and when it is even, he puts on the musselage of arnica and oil, as we have said, then he commands that it moves little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and command that she sneezes, and make her sneeze. in the same way for all of the afterbirth
in the same way for all of the afterbirth When it comes out in this way to all of the afterbirth, then scrape the afterbirth with your fingernail until the moisture is evacuated;
and if the child lies on its face and on its neck, then the mother will smother it, and the child will die.
then put the child inside, so that you have placed him as it should be, and instruct the woman to hold on for a while:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens seldom. Twins are a strange thing, and they do not live long if they are few in number.
I know that when they are multiplied and separated by the placenta, which is attached to the womb,
and sometimes they issue naturally just like one child, as we have said.
And if they grow quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let the nurse be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it benefits to health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb as 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or more up to 15, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorified Sage
and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all this, because a similar thing might happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman of a stillborn child or of a pregnancy, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no sign of life, and you are forced to perform an operation with your hands; if you should know whether a woman is of healthy disposition, and does not have an accident or fear of death;
if the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down, and her legs raised;
and apply the ointment to .10 parts, or she lies in bed so that she is not treated for childbirth;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mustard seed and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the baby's hands with these oils and musk; then press them gently, then bring .I. [the instrument] to the place where they are biting, which is suitable for this,
and be careful that the child is dressed so that it does not descend onto its head; if they bite their fingers in their eyes or in their throat or in their mouth or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides,
and if the swelling is on the feet, put the instrument or the finger and middle fingers;
and he should dye the nail on his right hand, and place the bowstring between the fingers of his left hand, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the nail into one of the holes we have mentioned, so that it reaches the hollow;
then insert another nail, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are even;
and then they should be moved evenly from one side to the other, so that the movements come out, and the nails should bite down to hold the movements, just as this shape shows:
And if some remains, then anoint the joint of one of his fingers with oil and push it into that part and pull on the other.
And if nothing remains, then move this joint higher up and keep doing this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it in .a. cloth, as much as possible.
then cupping on the joint of the palm or the wrist, and so you must do with the other hand, and at the feet.
And if the child's head is big and it is stuck in the birth canal, or it has an acute pain gathered at the top, you must push the thorny spear-like instrument between your fingers, and pierce the head and draw out the pain; or you can use the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapters that follow this one;
and so the infant is born with a large head naturally; and then pulls out the bones with tongs,
and if the head pops out and is forced, being split, so that the moisture which is in the bottom comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as small as you can;
and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture flows out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is light.
And if it is swollen in the belly or on the foot, then you must stretch it with .a. cloth wrapped around your hand; and pierce the belly or foot, so that the moisture that is in it flows out;
and if the other members are paralyzed, and the feet remain, then the surgeon should plunge his hand into the wound up to the wound's mouth; then he inserts a hook or two, and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrow due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, then one must apply moist and fatty substances; and the administrator should use poultices, and put on warm, softening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie down, then administer what we have said for a living child;
and if one cannot, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if the patient is suffering from those abscesses that come in the sea;
and bloodletting comes, then it should be put in restraining water, and other treatments administered.
And I saw a woman who had had a dead fetus in her womb, then another was sewn over it, and the other died. After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up so much that it opened and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong吸引 plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more. I was very wonderstruck, for I see that the belly has no bones.
I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Examine the wound and lay hands on the bones until the woman was in a better state. and thus the woman lived for a long time, and sometimes a little blood would issue from the wound;
and I have not recorded this chapter except that whenever masters find something strange, they should know how to apply a remedy.
to bring the bone back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is weaned; and at .ij. turnings at .ij. heads of .ij. strings. Nevertheless, the horns are more subtle in the constrictor, and they are made from ivory or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be one digit wide, and the rim of the tubes one digit, and long one palm and a half; and in the .ij. edges are two adjustments of this same tube, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are inserted into the mouth of the wound to open when you turn the two horns.
Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers; and has two heads, two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound opened to all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging and legs spread, then tie the two pieces of the instrument together at the bottom, and hold the head of the instrument between his legs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated and have many similarities; and when the surgeon prepares them, the work is faster and easier for the patient due to their design.
Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
When the placenta is retained during childbirth, instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then sneeze it out with force, while you press her hands against her mouth and nose. And if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pot and make an opening in the cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, fennel, anise, and marjoram.
All of these herbs, or some of them, are boiled in water over the fire; then place one end of the pot in the mouth of the womb, and the other end in the pot.
and the dye until the vapors come within the marble; then make it sneeze, as we have said. Then let the secondine boil gently. And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the bather to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in the juice of alder, and then wash it off naturally,
and seek out the secondine; and when she has found it, she should squeeze it gently and extend it little by little, so that the marble does not crack; But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come out and be dislocated.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have described the cure for sneezing, and the fuming of herbs;
and if it is not one of those that we have mentioned, then beware of pulling;
but it is necessary for the person at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse with a four-drug ointment;
if she can, then she will; but even so, when she does, there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and it hurts the patient.
So, therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman in retention of flowers and secundines, if it is this:
And it is made of glass like a cane, and one puts the small end in the nature, and the wide ends above the fire;
and have the fuming done over the coals, and the pestilence until it is wasted, and start another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born without their fundaments pierced; instead, they have a thin, subtle membrane. therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane gently with her finger and not with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to break it;
then put on wet linen with wine and oil, then the ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden rod in the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
And sometimes this clotting comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a rod of pine.
from the fistula in the fundament Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come out of the anus or in the space between the two parts.
If there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens up and lets out a white moisture or thin pus.
And sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out of the body through flatulence or wind when the patient belches, and sometimes one pops out.
And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach the hip joint and up to the testicles.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And thus one knows a fistula is piercing at the anus, and not piercing: and you should push your index finger or a needle into the anus, and push a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.
And if it is tortuous, then push in a tent made of thin splint, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or windiness, as we have said; So that it does not pierce through, then hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula has reached the bladder or urinary tract, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it has pierced all the way to the hip joint, then the tent will be inserted all the way in; if there is twisting and pain in the area around it, then it will be removed, and medicines or salves will not help.
and for these persian ulcers there is no cure other than hard work and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle in them.
For that which is not persian and not old, there is hope of healing through iron, as I have experienced.
And the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs tilted towards his belly; Then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you should insert your index finger
and once it has pierced the membrane, and you feel an opening between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is perforated; one cannot work on it without causing harm.
One can still heal some, but this rarely happens;
and one helps it by heating the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it into the fistula all the way to the bottom, and do this 2 or 3 times, until you know that the false growths, which look like an owl feather, are burned;
and then treat it with moist bandages dipped in butter, until the growths come out, and then treat it with ointment that softens and heals.
If he is healthy, that's good. If not, it cannot be otherwise healed;
and if it enters the tent and does not penetrate to the bottom which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; if he cuts at the beginning of the fistula, and then fills it with clay before the tent, and then cauterizes afterwards, until he reaches the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and will fall; then he should cauterize those false flesh-like things that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus flows, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: the burning of these charred spots, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture.
Then treat tents that are wet with butter or crushed substance until the places ooze, and let the fires burn in the affected areas.
Then treat the wound of swollen, tough, hard pimples with dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is distant from the body, put your finger in the fundament, and probe it.
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the membrane or the syphilis, or it is about to pierce, then do not use force but rather have faith and hope through one of the three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the tenement that holds the fundament, and let the evacuations come out through there as well. then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that cover and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, or by tent or other pointed instrument; then mend that broken bone in the wound as best you can;
then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas in this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side near the foundation below the skin above. take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape: And he inserts a twisted thread into the tent, and inserts the tent into the fistula all the way to the tip.
If it pierces through the margin near the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, as you would put your finger into the foundation.
and draw the head out with thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold them tightly for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, as long as the threads draw close to each other, and stick;
then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not advisable to bandage it so tightly during the bleeding, and then during the treatment, as we have said, until he is healed.
The form of the spiny sputum which they make into a fistula is very sharp on one side and pointed; and on the other side it is not, so that one should not bandage it as one should not bandage, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood. And there can be one or more of them, and some are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture.and those inside ooze blood.
And they ooze a little water or a little blood, and they are the color of the body;
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you command the patient to stretch themselves out in bed, until the hemorrhoids emerge and the veins are exposed; If you are in a hurry, seize it with tongs or your fingernail, then pull it out by its roots.
And if the nails cannot hold it due to moisture, then grab it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair. Pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on them, which is in place of cauterization. Or you can cauterize them as stated in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the fundament cannot emerge, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it may emerge clearly.
when the patient defecates, and if the thread is drawn out from the fundament, then the cure is easy. and you should pull them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
If you must administer the suture according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread through the top and pierce the needle from another side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide; then tighten the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw off the excess blood;
then place over the wound a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or with cerate, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him defecate, and when he has defecated, then cleanse him with ointments and other remedies until he is healed.
from dryness of the anus or rectum Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation or when the illness is old and medicine doesn't help.
You should cut away at the end of a spatula or your fingernail, scraping off the top layer which doesn't allow moisture through. Then dry it until it is completely dry as it ought to be.
And if it cannot be dried, then scrape away more aggressively than before until it heals and is completely dry. then cure it until it is healed.
where there is trembling A flea is a small creature that creeps under the body and bites deeply;
and sometimes it bites, and one feels it like a deathly trembling, and it comes over the whole body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a feather of an goose's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put this feather on the vein, so that the purple circle covers the vein all around; then turn your hand along the whole feather until you feel all around the vein, and push it in deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
And if you see, make this out of a feather of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and curved on top.
do not pierce it, so that it can hold the vein, and squeeze it And if you see, cauterize the vein, as it is before in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of melted copper or small and large stones, depending on the person to whom they are administered.
Those which are administered to children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the stomach is bound according to this manner:
and it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts the medicines is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and there is one inch between each hole, then insert one strong thread of twisted yarn into each hole, and gather the belly together like a goat's skin; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently.
Then the operator squeezes the bulb with both hands simultaneously until it is empty, then withdraws the catheter and leaves the patient lying on his back.
And if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even better.
And if you catheterize him for a flux of the belly, and the medicine rushes out, then he should repeat it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then the enema should be as thin as for a child.
and this is the form of the thin enema that causes the skin to stretch:
wounds
We have already discussed in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss the treatments by hand and medicine, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The things by which wounds are made are by stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a spear, staff, arrow, or similar objects.
Or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar organs;or it is made by fire, or cold, or both, or by wind, or by moisture, or by dryness, or by change of weather, or by change of place, or by change of food and drink.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, since the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you fear a hot abscess quickly: then make the wound bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part;
and reduce the patient's consumption of wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his diet should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat rich food;
and put sore on the wound, if hot abscesses come, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by air, powder that I will describe shortly:
and if the wound has been moved by the heat, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be reached, and holds only by a little, then cut it off; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not close to the bone, then cut out the pus completely, and pour it out, then cure it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: you must apply this powder which will heal as soon as the burn has healed.
And the way to make the powder is: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and grind them together finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly until it is well healed and joined to the flesh;
and then bandage it well, leaving it untied if it is swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
And sometimes one should use chalks only when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the wound has healed.
And if the wound is not healed, then one should use this powder:
but place some digestive ointments or barley flour made with water and honey on the wound until it becomes dry. then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about head fractures after.
of the wound in the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck may be cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let it be and put nothing on it that would constrict, for it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw. And put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But the medicine should be warm, like chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water, and other moist stones according to this manner.
And if the wound is large, cut and ligature it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of bowels, so pierce her at a lower place;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, then ligature it, and let it be, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the carotid, and the conduit is kept, through which the meat goes, if it cuts the carotid above the throat, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape; and then strains it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then heals it with purifying poultices until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then it wants; and if there are pieces of bone, draw out all that you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave as they are until the wound heals. and the dislocation should be readjusted and aligned with its proper position.
And if the wound is fresh, put powder on the powder that I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
of the wound of spear or knife
If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound is deep, then look to see if from the wound wind escapes: know therefore that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep but the wound is fresh and bleeding profusely, then do not put on the powder at first, nor ligature it for the blood that escapes profusely, and let the patient rest; but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days; if there comes no cramp, nor trembling of the heart, nor twitching of the eyes; and when you see good healing, then you know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is an abscess, then you know that there is a fistula; so treat it as it should be treated.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then treat it as one who is in front;
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn fragments, then treat the wound, and pull out the foreign objects if they are loose. and if they are not loose, let the wound fester so that the extractions can be relieved.
and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
from a rupture in the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intestines are introduced;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger one;
because one puts them back in more easily when they are warm, if they have become cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more on their own,
and therefore it is better for the smaller wound to reset the intestine to its place rather than the others. 2
And you should know that there are four types of hernia in the belly:
The first two common ones occur in the abdominal wall,
and the suturing of other wounds on the body, and another two proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are more suitable with the suturing of the abdomen, and I will describe each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and no intestine protrudes, and little needs to be done, this is by one of two methods: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: wet a sponge or soft cloth with lukewarm water, or you cook in hot water with squinant, cypress, and spike. and you wash the intestines until they are clean;
and sometimes this wine is made constricting, and it is better to drink it to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling go down, then cook the intestines in water or altus and malvasia, for by this the entrance is blocked with very little.
and if it cannot enter, then they make a small wound with the instrument used to cut out hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is bloodletting rather than cutting, which one should not cut without great need;
and this is the tool to split it with:
it cuts within the curve and out, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if he puts it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is worth it.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs above his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ii. parts, place it so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
and so one should manage what I say about large and small wounds.
For small wounds, apply what you are experienced with,
then have at hand a minister who can stop the bleeding with his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common way of sewing
and this is the common way of sewing and you should thread a needle or more, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about a thumb's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the wound,
then pull them tightly with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then assemble the two halves of the wound smoothly,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and then leave .I. space, and he pushes another needle; then pull the thread through as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of the needles, until all the wound is closed;
let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well enough: therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not cut and open the wound before healing.
and then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not poke the patient while sleeping, and put tents or sheets on the tips of the needles to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle and a strong, thin thread; and when you have pierced these four together,
and when you have pierced these four together, then re-insert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner of sewing cloth.
and make the distance between each stitch the thickness of a thumb nail;
this stitch should be seven times the length of the needle;
and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly,
which had been made by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and the intestines protruded well over two palms in length,
and the wound was on his belly. I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside his body for twenty-four hours.
The wound was sewn up and healed within fifteen days, and he recovered.
And those who saw him believed that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I didn't treat it with ointments because I was in a place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine; and I put cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and tie it to the end of a thread;
when it has pierced the right heart directly, then insert the needle into the throat or cost where you have blown.
and pierce through from the other side of the part inside just to the skin;
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the leather workers do skins, and leave one side of the throat once and grab it from the other, so that the stitch is complete.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly,
is if it is like how two parts are naturally joined together. They apply one end of the thread to one end, in such a way:
take a needle and pierce only that spot nearby, and let the two jaws of the forceps then turn the needle and pierce from the outside to the inside, as two jaws of the forceps;
then pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside, in two other jaws of the forceps that are on the other side;
and this is the usual method of sewing, and the most common one.
Galen says this, and some people testify to it,
one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread on each;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and know that when the rupture is in the belly, the incision is more difficult than in other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, if one re-inserts the intestines and sews up the wound; then put on the cauterizing powder mixed with charcoal,
if one re-inserts the intestines and sews up the wound; then put on the cauterizing powder mixed with charcoal, and if it burns the meat, put some ointment on it that is at hand until the wound heals over; and tie the thread tightly and sew up the slits, and the mawmet and the apes; then treat the wound as with the others until it is healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if you have no medicine, apply aged cotton and move it twice a day until it heals.
For in many simple wounds, you need no other medicine;
and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the principal members, if it is necessary to moisten with a light woolen cloth dipped in warm oil, or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if there is pain or swelling in the bones, and this happens many times, treat him with warm rose oil, or olive oil,
and pierces inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is raw, and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread is cut from the wound, he puts it back as soon as possible while the intestine is fresh;
if it is old and turned red or black, then you should ligature the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it, because there are veins and arteries in it;
then cut what is between the ligature, and put both shoulders hanging from the part below the wound until relieved for extraction when the stitches are removed, and the wound is closed.
of the treatment of boils
When the intestines are damaged, and the wound is small, one can repair it in some ways,
because I saw a man pierce his belly with a lance;
and was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it was filled and became a fistula, and from it came the digestion and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to apply poultices until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw that it had healed, I feared that the patient still had evil in his belly; and it did not harm him, but he remained in good health, eating and drinking;
and some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way: take lamb's testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the scrotum has opened, put it on both lips,
then put another tremor after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely seized;
and watch the wound. If they get stuck in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the tip of this intestinal thread and make sure it is very dry, and then tie to the head of this thread a thin, twisted flax thread then thread the needle with the flax thread and sew up the wound; and then dislocate it again in the same place.
and this method of sewing up a hernia is not successful except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing except by subtle means.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula". and especially when it is deep and narrow.
And a fistula is according to the green knotting of a hard and white node, where one does not feel pain, and it is like a feather on an bird's wing;
and sometimes it is clear and translucent, and other times opaque; sometimes small, and other times large enough;
And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no scabs; this occurs only for one of the eight reasons;
that is, by the littleness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and upon the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much bowing; the bones are porous, and the tissue is of poor quality; or the medicine is not effective in the treatment; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, digestion is slow, and health comes late, and it swells by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I must tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the sinus, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the sides, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all of these fistulas that are in this way are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you trust its treatment, and you see it, take a tent of copper or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a slender, blunt needle because the slender one bends around the crook;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot probe it well with needles, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
for moisture quickly passes from one hole to another and cleanses.
then you should let it bleed until you can tell whether there is bone or nerve, and it is completely healed.
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you know for sure the location, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or in any of the ways I have told you, if the cup according to what I have told you,
or in any of the ways I have told you, if the cup according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and putrefied matter within; and then treat the wound until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep in a straight line, you must open it as much as you can, then I wet the tent with medicine water, and insert it to the head of the fistula.
then I wet the tent with medicine water, and insert it to the head of the fistula. until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then I apply heating ointments to healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it out. If a vein or nerve causes you distress in your limbs, as we have said,
and if the bone is exposed and there is rot and darkness within it, then cut into it until all the rot is removed, then cleanse it with healing things until it is healed,
and if it is not healed, return to the previous steps as before, know that you have not yet reached the spring:
if you uncover and desire to reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if this is so, then it is healthy. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way except to let nature take its course;
and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if he pulls with .a. suitable instrument for this,
and if there are many bones, he should pull them all out;
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, then grip and hold firm, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound to encourage pus. and let it fester around the bone,
and then they will have looser bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, if you simply treat the corruption until the darkness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great deal of corruption and it reaches to the bone; if it needs to be cut away and covered all the way to the corruption, then clean the wound until it is healed over;
and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man on his leg. so that you may take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
so that the matters came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no cause to discharge in order to open;
but their madness made them work so much that they opened the abscesses and much matter came out and became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and moisture flowed from the body;
and many received treatment for two years, and there was no wise man in medicine
as long as I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and what runs through the openings of the body to a great extent; and the bodies of young men became red and had a citron-like colour.
I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then I explored all the openings,
and found that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
I hastened therefore, and struck one of the holes, so that I uncovered a part of the bone; and found it rotten and pierced through, and the corruption reached up to the bone within;
I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I took out;
and began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then recommenced, and exposed the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then took care to close up the site;
but I could not, although I cut around a palm of the bone, and let it drop out completely, and then restored it with medicine; and it healed quickly and closed up,
and there is no need to repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure. and the fear of death I had for him. For there was often bloodletting but he was completely healed
For there was often bloodletting but he was completely healed and grew on the bone a hard lump, and he was in good condition and did not have any discomfort or contrary effect in all places, neither in eating nor moving around.
and are drawn up, so that you treat the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above the site where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not break the skin; and place a hot brand or a flat object underneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must draw out as much of the swelling as one can see and feel, and draw it out again.
And if the bone is broken, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part and discovers all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath
and then sew from one side of the corruption to the other, and let the sewing be as far from the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut through the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone on the other side;
and if the dislocation is in the two joints, there is no other cure except to cut;
and if the dislocation is at the knuckle of the hand or the ankle, it is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must investigate the dislocation, how it appeared to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to hurt the vein or nerve;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and you will know that the tools and needles for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the ears. and their thickness and their thinness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason one must prepare for each type of work its instrument;
and you will know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; then prepare the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
fire Shoulders can dislocate due to internal causes or external causes;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, but they are ineffective, then cover the affected limb up to the site of the corrosion, so that the patient escapes either by death or, more likely, by the defect in the limb;
so that the patient escapes either by death or, more likely, by the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears burnt by fire, and then after darkness comes, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; so you should hurry to cover it,
and if it's from the sting of some venomous beasts, like a scorpion, viper, and similar creatures,
if the corrosion is on the head or face, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, then grip at the joint so that the cautery does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then grip at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no use in remedies that do not match its potency;
And do the same when the cautery comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then grip after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it ascends into the leg, cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to cut off the patient's leg;
and the way of binding the member whether above or below is that you bind it above and below, and one assistant stretches one of the ligaments down, and another assistant stretches the other ligament up, and you loosen the flesh which is between the two ligaments by one spatulum wide, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or tie off the thread, and place a linen pad on each side so that the thread does not touch the healthy tissue, and bring about another injury and abscess in the patient.
And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the wound heavily. Or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
Then bind the injured member with suitable bandages and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a certain man in his sleep:
he experienced darkness resembling a burn from fire,
and this corrosion began in his toe of the foot, until it spread all over the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot and it healed;
and a long time after, the corrosion returned in his finger of the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed things that cause reverberation after cleansing the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to cup his hand, but I refused because I had no hope of reverberating the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he gave up hope altogether and returned to his land, and he put a bandage on his hand, and was healed;
I have told you everything for now, in case someone else needs to know more.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then they burst and discharge, and the place remains hollow, just like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as a loose napkin and they do not extend to the bone or nerve, and such an injury is called "superficial".
but if it extends to the bone, it is called a  "fistula".;
and cure it by covering all around with a cloth, especially when it is thin like a kerchief. and do not fear its destruction.
And if you are confident that the skin will heal and there is no deep corruption, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it thus:
Examine if the breasts are swollen, and if the nipples have a foul odor. then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made thus: Take asafotida, oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and mix them together while heating in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
take some of this according to your need, and they make it with water and honey, and they use it as an enema for the breast, and constrict the orifice; and leave the medicine in for about two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
do this as often as necessary until the breasts are deflated and the swelling is gone;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should crush ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them,
then let it flow, and use it as a clyster, until you know that the wound is clean.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, if he enemas with water and honey, or a little burnt copper. or you can enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey can cleanse and wash away, and wine makes blood flow;
and when you have done this, and are confident that the intestines are clean, if he enemas with what causes flatulence inside him,
and you should apply a diaphoretic ointment, and the poultice with rose oil and wine; or you can enema with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the section on ointments;
and if the anus is small and the enema cannot enter, if you enlarge it a little with an iron tool, and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave it only as wide as the syringe can enter,
and if the bleeding orifice is above, then the cup or lower down where it is. Because when the bow is fully drawn, no arrow should be loosed. and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bow points to the lowest position it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, you shall dress it in this way: let the bow run easily downward and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidating remedies to place over the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then cut as much of the breast's opening as possible. Make it larger than the first one. then apply a soft ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the breast's opening to soothe the pain. Do not remove the large cloth for several days at once.
And the one who is on the breast's opening, remove often to remove the pain, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom, or pus, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has extended in such a way, and you see the nature that rises through the aperture of the breast, if you know that the breast milk has dried up, and approaches health;
and then loosen it in the morning, or noon, and when you loosen the wound, change another cloth and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows for many days, know that the breast will not dry up. And if subtle poisons persist after a long time, do not despair of health,
because saints are near. For there are men who slowly heal wounds with ointments, and others who do the opposite;
and if food is indigestible and a woman vomits after many days, know that her milk will not dry up;
and if the breasts are slow to dry up, and are distant, then apply medicines which are moist in substance but dry in effect; such as diaphenon ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and that is the best medicine.
take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rose wine of equal substance;
then cook it and use it; and with the same, you can make cooked honey thickening, when a definite ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; and then they glue a piece of cloth, and apply it to the chest, and sometimes they administer a long aristolache. and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them into powder, and put it on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is long, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts of the body, or in the soft tissues. if there is a wound from a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panaritys is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps it grows in other parts;
and when it is neglected and not treated, an abscess will form; and they grow and flow pus as far as the root of the nail, and perhaps further;
and the corrosion goes to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe becomes swollen, and its colour turns yellow.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, you should cut away all the excess growth under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to grow out, and bleeds, then you must put the thread under the nail so that it does not pierce the flesh, and pull it upwards gently and slowly, and put medicine on the remaining flesh to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
And if you see the tooth腐, cut it out in one of the gums as previously described, then treat it until it heals;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first; then cut the nail of the little finger slantingly from above,
and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, apply something to soothe it.
You should treat the hemorrhoids that grow in some people's hands by chance, which are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes fingernails,
and some grow at the base of the joint where the finger meets the hand. He who is born with a hernia in his navel must not move. And he who is born at the joint of the navel, by chance moves;
The size of that which is fleshy if it is light, in such a way: Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; you must keep him covered.
For one who is born where the anus should be, you must first cut around the flesh circularly down to the bone. Then cut the bone to a suitable depth, then cure it until it is healed.
The joints that come together come from birth, or from joining a wound, or from a burn, or from similar things.
Then you must treat this fracture so that the bones heal according to their natural shape. And put between two tents or dampened cloths in rose oil so they do not fuse together; Or you could place between two thin pieces of wood, until the joints are healed, as it should be.
If this swelling comes to either palm with the fingers, then treat this fracture as it should be done.
Of evil
Wounds are large enveloping openings filled with melancholy superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
and they occur more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in other people.
Therefore, you should administer an emetic to him occasionally, and then cleanse him with basil water.
The treatment with fire is according to two methods: one is that they cut it, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
Incision is according to this manner: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then stretch the leg from the ailment above the thigh down to the part under the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad incision,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to drink possets made with black gall;
and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, as is beneficial for the patient.
The treatments for this are as follows: shave the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then cup the vein from above at the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the Achilles tendon, and scorch the vein from both sides, until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then pierces the vein below, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be pricked gently,
then scrape the skin above the vein until it bleeds, then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the vein, as you did before, and prick it with another needle, as you did before;
then cut another wound, or several if you need to, then lift it, and cut at the heel of the foot,
then pull and lift until the second wound; then extract it from wound to wound, until it comes out completely, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with two strong threads, then tie it and pull it out, and put it under a thread, then turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be sure it does not pop, for if it pops, one cannot milk or raise it, and the patient will suffer harm.
and when you have finished milking it, place a compress of wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
And if the wound is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said, you must split it tortuously, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have already said.
you must split it tortuously, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have already said. The shape of the knife with which one opens the vein is curved, and does not cut unless it opens the vein.
And its handle is thick because if it were slender, it would cut the vein; but it must be thick as we have said, and this is how it should be shaped:
Of the civil vein
This vein is twisted in legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
and sometimes they grow elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens from the porridge that comes under the skin,
like serpents and worms that wriggle between skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like a plant root.
When the wound is open, you must wrap it with a piece of linen from one and a half fingers to two and a half fingers thick, and the knot,
and let the linen hang loose on the leg, and every time it slips out of place, wrap it around the linen and the knot. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover the root at all until it has completely healed. For if you cover it, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus and illness in that spot.
that it must be treated slowly until it reaches the head, and nothing remains in the body.
and sometimes this vein when treated for two or three palmeds long, or ten, and a man came to me whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cover it, it pierces like a needle and goes all the way through,
so that everything comes out; and after emptying the matter inside, apply healing medicine to it for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein bleeds freely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself, and it flows profusely, and it jumps like a spring; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows:
and there is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending. and it can be felt as it moves from one member to another, until it breaks through the skin where it is going, and jumps out.
and it causes swelling from certain humours, like worms and snakes and roundworms in the belly;
and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot help but feel pity when it moos:
Therefore, you must tie the udder firmly above and below with a strong string,
then milk it from above and pull it hard, and if the milk is mixed with blood in the udder and you do not milk it out, if you cauterize it with fire above it as it dies
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then squeeze under his eyebrow firmly, then pull upwards and out.
and one must use a cleansing agent for the body with digestive remedies for putrid humours,
and they are sick from eating poisonous meat.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, especially in the chest and abdomen, caused by the movement of wind or air. It can be acute and short-lived or chronic and long-lasting. People may experience symptoms such as belching, flatulence, or regurgitation of food. and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, quicker than anything else, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and moved to the shoulder,
and then a little while later, it ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm;
then he told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw it.
I was very amazed at how she moved from limb to limb like this; for I had never seen this disease progress in this manner before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I do not want to, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because women have dry skin and uncovered veins, and because of this, the wind is forced out.
And it does not appear in those who are healthy, who have moist skin and relaxed veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, examine above and below carefully, and then press gently until that forced wind leaves its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the cure for those who draw out winds, as with fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they land.
The diversity of their points is such that there are some with large, small, flat, and twisted points; and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with pieces; and dislocation occurs in any limb in two ways: either in a principal limb it dislocates,
such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it therefore dislocates in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about later appear: you must be careful about extracting this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely out, then draw it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of a brain injury when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the cerebrospinal fluid leaks out from above the brain, is when there is stabbing pain and swelling and redness in the affected area, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of consciousness, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes there is blood coming out of the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moisture white like pus, and also jumps as if from a burn.
And if this sign appears to you, then hold back on the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is in.
The signs of the wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not soft; and by chance the wound also becomes mute like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: you know without a doubt that death will follow.
And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the lung is foam coming from the mouth, and the throat swollen, and the patient's color changing, and panting heavily and seeking the cool air.
And if the arrow pierces the covering of the foot, it is near the small bones; and it causes great pain and great swelling and panting; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the gut, and no feces escape through the bowels, then there is no hope of a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and hip and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him on the jaw, at the root of his teeth: I probed it, and extracted it from beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without a trace.
And I extracted an arrow that had struck him in the grease of his eye underneath, underneath the eyelid: The arrow was bent back on itself, and he could not touch it except for the tip towards his face, And it was a great arrow from a Turkish bow, and it went through his ear; the jugular vein was healthy, and no bad accidents came to him.
And he took an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it went through his ear;
I removed the barb, and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And he took an arrow in his house, which was lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then if he has not passed .xxx days, he will not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and had no bad outcome.
And if you see a man whom an arrow has struck in the back, and the wound is closed over:
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change, he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man who had an arrow wound to the face, and the wound was sewn up;
and he remained like that without great pain; and many similar things.
And they extracted an arrow from a noble man of the king's household, who had been struck in the eye, and was a little tilted to the right side; and the arrow was fully drawn out
I was called to the wound after she had been bled for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I examined her thoroughly and felt nothing amiss; and she had a pointed pain under her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I placed an attractive and digestive plaster on the spot because the skin was swollen; and I saw the mark of the arrow.
and I saw the mark of the arrow. I applied the plaster more frequently, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time,
as long as he felt the arrow one day within his flesh; and he told me so. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened,
and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which protruded at the site; then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and transgressed the terms for four months,
then he lanced the wound that I had punctured with tongs, and probed it from side to side, but could not extract it;
Therefore I did not cease to use subtle and ingenious tools until the following day, when I took well-made tongs, according to what his condition will be by the end of this chapter, until I treated and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot heal: I restored it therefore, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I will tell you about the extraction of some arrows: so that you can apply your treatment according to what I say and not according to what the books say, for the books cannot encompass everything.
but the wise masters consider very little of what is present and lacking, and they do not seek out new works or new tools, or the descents of foreign things which occur in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumped out from where it entered, is an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, leave it until the flesh around it has rotted away and the exit wound has healed;
and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day;
and then it will jump out, and if it doesn't, then pierce around the arrowhead with a thin, sharp tool until the flesh around it is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body and cannot be seen, then cut her all over to find it. and if you feel it, then pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut as deeply as the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs inside that are holding it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs inside that are holding it in place, remove the flesh that is pierced by it up to the depth of 1/7 of a palm as deeply as you can, and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out;
and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and skillfully so that you do not break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding tissue has swollen; then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about curing in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and of opening a vein, and use whatever means you can to draw out the arrow without danger.
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and adjust the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck. for that is the best aid there is; and if you cannot, then have him moved according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where some substance leaks out of it, or the skin is swollen where one can see or feel it clearly:
Cut therefore up, as far as the forceps can reach, and then pull it out; if not, jump at once.
And if it is held in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
and if there is a piece of arrow in the wound, then remove all of it;
and if it is cut, and you see to administer a bandage, then he administers .i. instrument with hair, so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then tie it off,
and if the arrow is barbed, he ties .i. instrument with a point entering in, for aiding extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the shoulder, or buttock, or abdomen, or bladder, or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it, then cut it out;
and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract the arrow, and then sutured the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
The shape of forceps for treating arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the shape here:
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common body vessels The veins from which one heals are 31, of which there are 16 in the head,
that is to say: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-veins"; and the two arteries which are visible in the two temples; and two veins that are at the corners of the eyes, called 'the eyes' veins'; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars that are in the neck; and the .ij. veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and they are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and .ij. veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are .v. in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the neck, and common people call it the "neck vein"; and the means is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic. and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic bone, and it is the one they use for bleeding, which clearly opens below the navel.
The salvatelle is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second superficial vein, which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
The healing of veins which are behind the ears is aided by old catarrh and by migration. And the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the sick person,
And the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the sick person, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the sick person's neck with your thumb, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two spots depending on the head: so place your hand on your hip, and where you feel the pulse underneath your hip, press in.
take the lancelet, pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upstream. and cut through the skin and the vein well. Pierce it through the skin twice, and let the blood flow until you see it.
then tie it off and release it, until it is healed.
I have already spoken of incisions and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples is like old bloodletting. and causes dim vision and habitual weeping, and pain in the body of the eyes.
And the quality of the bleeder is such that I have described. and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels the pulse below your finger, and then signs in;
then gently press the vein above your finger with your index finger, and insert the lance below; and press the vein above, and milk it, as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top.
and then ligature it firmly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness.
and the quality is such that the patient turns his neck in twisting until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "spoon", whose form is thus:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then tie off the vein, and ligate it until it is healed, sometimes with a broad flax thread.
Nevertheless, the flax threads should not be too thin, and the wound should be stitched across, for the bone is near, and it may break the flax thread when it is fine.
The healing of the two veins that are in two eyes helps with their diseases, and with itching, and redness, and in the corner of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and their healing is that the patient turns his neck by twisting a bandage around it, as before;
then he heals it, and the healing is through the mouth, a little way down from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no meat.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then let blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on cotton, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for a stroke, and for a violent nosebleed, and for facial diseases, such as migraines and redness that come in the face, and especially when they are old;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts his head back, then squeezes his nose with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well, and now the blood will begin to flow;
and do not let it go too deeply, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for one night, because it is quickly restored;
The juice of .ij. guindeges helps with the stricture of the gullet, and with the beginning of measles, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with stomachaches;
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck backwards on both sides, as we have said. and the doctor stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair.
then heal the vein of the long one [finger] widely, then draw out the blood tempered, or as much as is needed;
then treat the other vein in the same way, then loosen the ligature, and constrict the veins gently, that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the bleeding of the lips: The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splitting of lips, and toothache and earache.
And the qualities of the bleeding are to have the patient sit before you, and constrict his neck as I have said: then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can identify them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins: so grasp one of each, and if you do not know how to identify them and you are in doubt,
so grasp one of each, and if you do not know how to identify them and you are in doubt, take the thickest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same technique.
On bleeding under the tongue Bleeding the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is good for tightness in the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeding person are such that they should sit in the sun with their hands hanging down, and relax their tongue, and look down each side to see a black vein;
then bleed both of them, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Veins of the neck from which blood is commonly drawn are healed according to two methods:
either by pricking with a very fine needle, or with an olive-shaped one as thin as a hair, and is called «anesil»; and are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the needle is very important, and it should be wide as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the veins which are smooth and filled with clear blood, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the flame olive:
and it is more pointed and delicate, and is for bleeding delicate veins that contain subtle yellow blood.
The basil vein, which is one of these veins, aids diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and the surgeon must bleed it copiously, and cauterize the artery beneath. And if he opens the artery, and bleeding ensues, then it must be staunched as I have said. and the flame should not be gripped, but tailed as a horse's tail.
And if basil does not open clearly, then you must strangle it and change to another; Or you want some of his blood, or you heal in his place the vein in the arm: it is revealed clearly. And the cup to the flame silence, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place of bleeding, then you must also stretch out the arm and feel the pulse until you know the place. Then mark the place with ink, then bind the arm, and cup the vein with the flame silence.
and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see it pulsing, for that is the artery; avoid it therefore.
And if you see it rising as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: then quickly put your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until it is healed; and be cautious and do not move it until the patient is cured.
If the blood is not staunched and it escapes, and you do not have any medicine available, then press on the artery to close it, for that is where the blood comes from; and then staunch the blood.
Take a piece of bark from an oak tree, cut it in half, and take one half and bind it tightly onto the wound until the next day.
If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then treat it with a styptic powder as we have said.
and the staunching is not effective in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding from a vein is helped if it draws blood from the head above and the body below. This is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deep and find the nerve, and if it swells and the patient is distressed, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument gently; and protect the nerve to the best of your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it longways.
Healing of the cephalic nerve helps, as it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes.
And it is necessary to heal it by pricking with an olive-branch or myrrh-branch flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Nevertheless, one must look for the easiest place, and not worry if one fails at first, and one begins again. and perhaps the spot swells in some men, when one fails at first, but it does not matter. The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to preserve health,
and to prevent future illnesses; and the wound should be made in one of the three veins: these are the cephalic, fast, and basilic; and one must let blood in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one must let blood on the first or third day, after two or three hours in the morning.
The healing that is administered to the sick has no set time, but whenever there is a need, day or night, at all hours and times.
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child beyond the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should those over 60 years old be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled in any way, they should first clear the intestines with a gentle enema, if he holds in much flatulence so that the veins cannot draw from the intestines the harmful excesses that injure the principal limbs;
nor is he healed who is swollen with meat, nor who is drunk, so long as he remains in that state, nor the dropsical;
and if one wishes to heal after colic pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with women, and exertion from work, from waking and fasting, and all that comes from the weapon or from the body;
then subtly reduce the humors if they are thick, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter the bath, if nothing hurts them, to thin the blood,
and heal the vein around the navel, as we have said;
and guard that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be relaxed and joyful, and the patient should be higher than the person healing them, and rub the arm two or three times,
then loosen the ligature above the wound, for when it is too tight or too loose, it will not heal.
and then rub the site with your hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
then wet the bandages with the flame of a little oil, then place his finger from his left hand on the wound underneath the site he wants to bleed, so that the wound bleeds and does not clot. For there are veins which flow like cords into the body, and some that are filled with winds. so that when one puts it over the flame, it draws back from the flame and cannot open the vein; and so it is with some of these.
and if the vein opens, then the wound is too tight, so one must be skillful with these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little lower on the leg or arm, if the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is afraid, then leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form; do not enter a bath, then start the bleeding again if she wishes;
and if the orifice is small, cut it short and you doubt that it will not emit as much blood as you wish, then pierce in that very orifice directly with a flame;
and work it gently, so that the limb swells; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not rebandage it but put a little oil there, because it lightens the body of blood, and the oil is changed in that place.
And so apply the oil to any bandage you use for opening veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And it also makes a cautery and a poultice when it is applied to the place; it subtly separates the blood vessels and disperses them when they are too congested.
And if there is a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bled before or when the opening of the vein is small, If you are in a hurry, place a damp sponge, wetted with water and salt, on the spot for a short time, then bind it tightly for an hour.
You should do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if a black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, it will not be harmful. And if you see any swelling, apply a poultice of aloe or myrrh, mixed with juice of comfrey, plantain, or similar herbs.
And often there is an abscess and a appearance of swelling at the site of the basilic vein; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel the area soft to the touch when compressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore be sure not to place anything on the sky that we have said, because it can go without from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed.
And treat each bleeding according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Because if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled little and often, and it must be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or deep cut.
And if the body needs bleeding, one should give damp bread in pomegranate juice; if it is scorched, then bleed three or four times.
And if it is of a cold complexion, one should eat damp bread dipped in muscatel syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if he faints during bleeding, after the loss of much blood, then he should inhale aromatic broth and subtle syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by significant bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wants to open his arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, then let him bleed at .VII. hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
For there is a great quantity of blood inside the body which has heated up and causes fever; therefore one must draw out a large amount and widen the orifice so that it drains through the palm. Then after you have learned all the methods of bleeding, place your hand on their pulse as they bleed so that death does not come through the palm, and this happens many times when the bleeder is negligent;
and when you see the arm dislocated, and blood coming out a second time, and the hole is closed, you should not press on it directly; nor if it is crooked, that he extend his arm suddenly, for that would be harmful;
but let it be until it heals the second time; then you can apply the flame to the tip, as long as the frozen blood at the opening of the vein melts away, and put on a little salt mixed with water, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be so, and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
And if it is necessary to bleed again a second time, then open the vein in the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arms are bled in the area of the main vein because it is composed of smaller veins.
And the way to bleed is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein becomes red;
then let it be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now through the middle, not from the side nor from the length;
and let the opening be wide, and let it be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put in there more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve in it.
The salve for saving the right hand is good for all illnesses of the liver, and this is how it works:
Hold the hand outstretched, and pour on warm water until the vein swells, as much as one can see. If it is twisted, and you bandage it from all sides, then it will not hurt at all.
Do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely exposed under the skin,
and then applies the hand in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and bandages on the vein to heal quickly, and do likewise for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
Bleeding from the sophtene is good for all diseases that are beneath the body, as illnesses of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and illnesses of the stomach, and of the hips and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his healing is such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the wound until it breaks through. and if the wound is at the ankle, and further up the foot there are many blisters;
then heal it on the largest blister, or at the ankle, where it is most convenient to remove.
And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as in chopping; and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot issue, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing fails the first time, then try again a second time higher up, for the site is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do also with the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulse corresponds to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
The qualities of its pulse are such that the patient should enter the bath and twist above the ankle four times in alternating directions.
However, if it does not open, you should open the vein in any way possible, by pressing and crossing over the vein. It is better to press on it, as the location is safe, and it is very effective for many people.
It is better to press on it, as the location is safe, and it is very effective for many people. And if you do not mend it, then cut a vein on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and watch out for nerves;
and let the blood flow until you see it, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Of bleeding with a cupping glass:
Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this farting which is without pain occurs in two ways: either with fire or without fire;
and two others on either side of the neck; and the ventouse under the chin; and leeches on the two shoulders; and leeches on the crouches; and cupping glasses on the two arms; and cupping glasses on the two legs; and cupping glasses on the two ankles; and in bloodletting, do not draw blood except from small veins that are scattered across the body,
and therefore it weakens one no more than a bleeding vein; and it must not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is needed to bleed, or due to habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at all times.
for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and others who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who spit up a drop of blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood; and if there are those who faint, and see nothing but blood and darkness and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the full moon, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that come from the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this farting if it is in the place of bleeding from the cephalic,
and those of a cold complexion should not use it, nor those with catarrh, for it does them great harm;
and so the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their heads.
And those who are often bled should become unconscious, and so one should place the leech further down due to the fear of oblivion.Et si li maux sunt de la sainie de la cephalique, si convient mettre la ventouse en leu de la sainie de l’estomac, ou de la sainie du coeur, ou de la sainie des reins, ou de la sainie des poumons.
Ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and the base of the skull, and for this reason, it is useful for treating constriction of the feet. It also helps with fissures in the windpipe, and with hoarseness and swelling;
and it should not be pushed too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause injury to the throat, stomach, and heart.
The ventilation at the .ij. ribs in the neck is useful for headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and strangulation, and toothache.
and is in the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and blood does not flow profusely.
Ventilation under the chin is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the veins of the two lips.
Ventilation at the armpits is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Ventilation of the groins is useful for diseases of the groin, for it draws blood from these large veins
and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply into the skin, for beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass placed on the back is useful for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it must be large, made of brass, and well-made; and if it is too thin, it may break and cause large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for old pains in the joints, and in the hips, and in the bladder, and they relieve swelling; they are located at the .ij. sophenes, and the .ij. ankles, and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about fainting in various conditions.
The manner of applying the cupping-glass is to place it first empty, and draw gently, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the part become red and swollen, and the blood appear; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in dealing with the body, for there are those who have thin skin and large pores: therefore one should only strike once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, one should strike twice: the first time to open the way for the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, one should strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to strike once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we should strike repeatedly; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the termini should be such that the skin is pierced suddenly,
and those with thick and tough skin who have narrow pores should have the locations where the cups will be placed anointed with oil that is both astringent and dissolving: if it is on the head, use violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it's on the body, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar oils.
And if the person has a gross and cold surplus, take oil of wormwood, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
And if those whom one heals have tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied.
but one should wash it after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from aspen, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of honey, or infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and one should not bleed with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after being bled,
and one should fast when they are to be bled and when they have been bled. And beware if the person being bled is choleric and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; then they should eat cool foods such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and muck, dung from a stable, and moist meats.
And those of cold complexions should drink syrup of honey and medium-old fragrant wine, and muck, and dung from a stable, and small birds and pigeons.
and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give certain people triacle or musk before or after bleeding to comfort the main members; and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Leech cups that are placed without burning are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and on the gout, and on the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not tolerate being burned on wounds,
and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another, as we put leeches on the breasts when the nipples are sore; to reduce swelling in a member, as we put leeches on the belly and the bowels to reduce inflammation;
and removes pain when there is inflammation or a stone, and by its attractive power, it removes the inflammation or the stone from its place.
and thus it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only slightly; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the cup with warm water, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
And it has a diameter of two inches and a half-palm deep, and on the sides around the middle there is a small hole, as for pushing through an awl,
and it should be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron, for holding a candle,
and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
because the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the old, and for the thin than for the fat.
And so you should put this cupping glass on the member:
take the candle of wax or .i. linen, and put it in the middle of the cupping glass, at the end of the tube which is in the cupping glass, so that the heat is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the body part, and your fingers should be over the hole that we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapors can go out, and then remove the cupping glass;
and apply the poultice again as before, and repeat it often if needed.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, there is no tube or hole, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the body part only when empty;
and this is its form:
Leeches are not applied except in parts where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare flesh, such as ears or nose, and other similar places;
and the quality of their use is such that when you find leeches in clean, still water without mud, then they will attach to anything.
and puts them in warm water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs; then let him be bled and cupped, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply leeches;
and when they are swollen and biting, if there is a place where a cupping glass can be placed, then it should be used, for that is much better.
If not, then raise the affected area, and then apply water, very gently, and then squeeze it out;
and if the venom bites too near the body, soak .1. linen cloth in cold water, and lay it on top until the bite is stopped;
and if the bites are multiple, then apply ground glass, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
or you can place half-peeled beans on the site and leave them until they turn black, and it will stop immediately;
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the fresh blood, or push a needle in so that the leech can suck out the blood, and then put them on, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
And when you see that they are attached, then sprinkle some powder made from aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will let go right away.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people are speaking about this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I found no good ones.
And I know nothing, except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have attained wisdom, and through experience and the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly demonstrated the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters above.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sum of its contents and the chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and dwells upon its truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs in anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides, as long as nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or pregnancy, or old age;
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, namely, cool joints and lamb, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill himself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until he has recovered from his illness and returned to his former state of health.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling, or that have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and cow's stomach, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things. For with much swelling the fracture is reduced more quickly.
And know that broken bones in the elderly and those who are frail cannot heal well or join together according to their natural state due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too thin, such as the bones of small children.
But it matters not, reset the broken bone. Use large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, forcing it into its former position; do not stop there but continue to treat it. And for this, one should eat lots of thick meats as we have said before.
And you should know that fractures can occur in many ways.
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in crushing, like the crack in a quill used for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in crushing, like the crack in a quill used for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a clean break.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.
And each manner has its own cause, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place;
and the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted and clearly apparent on pressing with the hand;
and when there is no twisting and no pain on touching, then there is no fracture;
but it may still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture. You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it still very gently.
And you should know that when the fracture goes into a bone, and there are two disjoined parts, they must now be set to an even point so that the abscesses heal;
and if hot abscesses come, he should leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are pacified; then set it equal to the muscle that you can easily and bleedingly, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it should be done afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, let it be split into two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
and put the member back into its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you should reset them by all means in their proper places, as much as you can, and be careful that your treatment does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well aligned; then adjust it properly, and do not pull or press too hard, as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their treatment, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is healed, then be very careful with the patient so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise. and make sure the member is secure so that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members vary in smallness and size and shape.
For there are small members such as fingers and toes and the like; so you should wrap them in soft, thin linen.
And for larger ones such as the thigh and leg: you should wrap them in a wide, sturdy bandage, because wide bandages embrace the entire large member and constrict it evenly all around, so that there is no swelling.
then he wraps the wound lightly with 3 or 4 turns of bandage depending on the member, and tightens his hand a little all around the bandage, then goes above the dislocation and tightens it less, so that the dislocation is then moved slightly away from itself.
and softens the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another bandage and go around directly above the broken place;
then go to the part under the dislocation and tighten it gently, not too strong or too gentle, as we have said in the first bandage above;
then put between the bandages of linen or cloth so that they are all even, then tie it all above with a bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it for several days.
Then, stretch it over your fingers, and let it be half the width of a broad finger or a piece of wood used for making knives, or the width of a palm tree frond, and let it be shaped like this:
But the finger that one places over the dislocation should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
And it should be as long as necessary for the limb, either small or large;
then tighten around the splints just as you did at first, then tie a thread over it just as you did at first over the break.
the tighter it is underneath, the less pain there will be; and the thread must be medium-sized, not too thick or too thin, and made of soft flax.
because if the threads are thick, as I have seen foolish people make their bandages out of twisted coarse flaxen cords, and this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be more than two fibers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is raw under the splints after the dislocation, then put beneath them flax or lambswool, so that it does not blister.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the hernia is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And you should not extract all the broken bones on the first day. Because when a limb is large, one should not put splints on it until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess;
and here is the method of ancient splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: You should take flour that is ground at the mill and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of the splint that restores fractures in many ways, especially in women and small children, because it is not too cold or too hot.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts each of elderberries, ladanums, aniseed and asafoetida, and gum arabic; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechi 8 parts; grind them into powder and mix with egg white. If the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones until they heal, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster that is good for twisting: take myrrh and viscud, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 8 parts; açai berry 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts, and grind well, and cook in water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones: take a new lamb's wool, moisten it in lard and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain. It also smooths out bumps on the bones and reduces swelling.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster out of it.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to reduce the swelling of the abscess. Take the root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; and grind, and cook with wine, and if the member is inflamed, cook with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of plaster that is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take the roots of comfrey, and flax seed, fennel, milk thistle, and blackthorn, and violet flowers and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and cook with salt water or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hypochares says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member except to restore it with a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it be kept between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, and similar things, as we have said.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if so, do not loosen it for several days.
And if pain or itching comes to the area, or discomfort or swelling, then act quickly and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moss, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry bed, moistened with water or rose oil, and cover it with a cloth, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;
and relieve the inflammation in the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle massage, and use a little ointment, and do not pull as hard as before; gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and bandages, then restart it, just as you did before.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, do not remove it for 3, 4, 5, or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone approaches the flesh.
then reduce it more than before, and increase the meat, as I said earlier; and if you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot reach it. arise from hot water, every time you release it, and this is each third day, and loosen a little the bandage.
through this work thus the healing reaches the limb, and gradually improves that which the foolish do, who restore the limb crookedly: it is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing else than weariness and doing it correctly.
of the various ways of breaking There are many types of fractures, with different shapes, and the causes are varied.
for it has fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the shoulder blade which is under the bone, as in an axe or pole; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "axe fracture".
Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "surface fracture"; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is a concussive impact, or a cleaving or collar-bone fracture from stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
And if there is a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane under the bone, or it is on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
And if there is a wound which is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this fracture is called 'capillary'.
and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling or by similar means, and drives the bone below, and the site is hairy like the blacksmiths when they work on the anvils; then the stone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as children's heads;
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that fine pieces are dislocated as if they were tiles; and I will speak about this later.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction over them, and the interrogation under a tent, and through the corruption of the flesh that is above.
The hairline fracture is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it, and a black line appears.
In the treatment of fractures, be careful of bad omens from the patient, and if you see any harmful signs, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes popping out, or similar signs in various conditions, then they cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you don't see any frightening signs and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
And if it is in the spring, you should remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the skin under the foreskin does not rot and the complications we have mentioned arise.
And if the fracture of the bone extends just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the damaged part thus: and you must hold the head of the injured person firmly, and expose the bone in all the ways you can, and as deeply as you can into the wound,
and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, then assist with whatever is appropriate, and fill the wound with soft rags soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed and you are sure there is no bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of operating. The first way is that you cut a close fit in front, and this is the shape:
And then [you cut] another slit larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleeding the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it all around, so that you apply cuts with chisels, not so deep that they go through the bone, and you should have a rim or circle on top, preventing the point from going through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all parts of the head. And this is the shape of the 3 types of chisels:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place a probe on the bone and move it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space between the bones with your incision tools as subtly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and drawn the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the sharp edge that remains on the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision tool, but it should be more slender and sharper than the other incision tools.
If anything remains of the small bones or any chips, remove them gently with one of your tools; then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have described.
And another method of treatment, which Galen describes and highly recommends, is as follows: First you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you place under it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has this shape.
And do not cut on one side, but the part is jagged in .ij. sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit gently with a small mallet, so that you carefully strike the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane underneath it.
If it is attached to the bone, then loosen it gently, because one can loosen it well without harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce all the way to the membrane, and it is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a very subtle rasp; one must have various sizes according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you use a large razor at first, then one that is more delicate, and do not stop doing this until it is good.
In each of the other hair-cutting and shaving techniques, you must adapt to the individual, and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not devoted themselves to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you should place a linen bandage, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it over the wound; then take another bandage that is doubled over two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put too much pressure on the wound, then apply another ligature above it, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound;
and let it stay like that for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it and apply remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things. Make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and then apply other remedies without biting;
and ensure that the wound is clean before you leave off the ointment and do not allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's membrane, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient. When one applies something biting to a wound, it bites into the flesh.
Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
And if blackness does not come but because of the medicine one has put on it, that such virtue has, you must take a part of honey and mix with it three parts of rose oil and mix them into a paste, and place it on the wound; then treat him with appropriate treatments until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, one only, for there are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break, but only swells or becomes dislocated, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should put your little finger or a probe into the nose, and push the broken part back into place with your index finger, and hold it there until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the fracture is in the part above the teeth, and the jaw cannot reach its place, then you should put it equal to the head of a rather thick rod.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscesses are appeased, then attach to the head of the jaw tenters of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you attach one to another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tenters be so thick that they fill the holes of the jaw.
And some restorer said that one must wet the bandages with butter and change them every day. It seems to me that this is not good, but they should be wet in preparation of egg yolk and mill powder; then leave the bandage, until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes feathers of geese are put in place of bandages, and over this a silk cloth is wound around, and the fracture is bound tightly, and the patient breathes through it; now do as you will.
And if hot abscesses come to the ears while you are working there, then put cerate or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a poultice of diaquilone.
And if hot abscesses do not come, then put on a warm poultice of flour of sisamen and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put over it light sponges, but do not bandage the ears.
and if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate tools for that purpose, then close the wound and treat it with healing, warming poultices and ointments suitable for that purpose.
and if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with tents and insert splinters of wood until it heals.
Regarding the dislocation of the jaw:
When the jaw is dislocated beneath and there is no external wound, and the dislocation is only slight without any fracture, they can be recognized easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to put your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and make it even with the other hand by force.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in [one of two places], then you must administer extension in one part, so that it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or splitting, then they must be restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put a cerote on the broken jaw, and place upon it a double piece of cloth; and upon the cloth, place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather of equal length and width according to the jaw, and bind it in place as tightly as you can; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the shape is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back into place what has changed; and apply a poultice over it, made of powdered millstone with an abundance of egg or flour of salsify, after you have removed the cerote; and upon the poultice, apply a thin layer of lamb's wool, and if the poultices become soiled, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes for him to recover; many times recovery takes place within three weeks.
And if hot abscesses arise, then administer what we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it subtly with suitable instruments for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to encourage scabs, until it is healed.
of the forceps The forceps breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three patterns: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to restore; or there can be a break with a wound.
And the procedure is as follows when the break is without a wound: you need two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder where the forceps are broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then, with your fingers, bring the broken pieces together so that the joint is in the correct position, with no visible gap or misalignment.
If you need to extend the joint further, place a round pillow of cloth or fabric under the shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then release the forceps and hold the pillow in your hand, bringing the broken pieces together so that they are aligned correctly.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of its socket because it comes in deeply, then the patient should lie on his back, and put one ear to the ground, and the minister should push the shoulder down while lifting the bone of the shoulder.
Then you should apply the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you must split it; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of an overgrowth, then cut it at one of the incisions you have made; but put this instrument under the shoulder to ward off the syphilis:
and is shaped like a spoon, but not flat, and is as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; and has two handles, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the shape of the incision you made when you pulled the bones.
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the incision is small, or if you doubt the hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and tents according to its amount.
And if there are deep abscesses, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
The dislocation of a bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to apply the powder of the mill and egg white, and put light dressings on top, and place a splint underneath if necessary. Then take a very wide band of cloth about the width of a palm, then put a double layer of cloth over the dressings and plaster; next take a thin strip of wood about six inches long and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the strip over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and adjust it from each end, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then release it;
let the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under his shoulder to raise the shoulder joint; thus the fracture of the collar bone will be relieved by the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it unless some mishap occurs, for up to 20 days.
then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and leave it on until it is healed; usually it takes 28 days to heal, but some people recover in less time.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
It can happen that the shoulder is broken or displaced, and it does not hurt when touched; then adjust it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then apply powdered flour with egg white, and light gauze, and place it on a double piece of cloth; then place it over a wide and thin stone, which is slightly larger than the shoulder. If there are bumps underneath the stone on the shoulder, then cover those bumps with gauze so that the stone sits evenly. Then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the stone does not move from its position, and check the binding every day; and each time it becomes loose, tighten it again, and adjust the stone if it has moved out of place. Let the patient lie on his side, and the shoulder will be healed in 20 to 25 days. When these number of days are complete, then remove the bandage, and be careful, for it is not a bone that heals easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, they should cut it off, and the bone, and do what we have said about relieving the hot abscess.
from the break in the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it is more often broken on the top. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the bottom, and the patient feels great pain and loss of strength, and becomes weak all over, and may vomit blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, which feels very painful.
And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a pillow between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together and bring the ribs close together with his hands, making sure that the bones are in their proper position; then he should apply plasters and bandages over the broken bone, using salt or some other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it firmly to the bone so that it does not move; then he should bind the linen tightly around the waist, and every hour loosen the binding, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosed for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and wash away what has come out from the wound, and dress it according to the various methods of treatment; then re-apply the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs
Know that rib fractures occur only in the large ribs near the back, and in the upper part inside, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one feels it well on examination at both ends.
And the treatment is that you put it back in place, as it should be. And then apply the ointment, and hold it steady with a bandage, if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, for the bone punctures the lining; and he has difficulty breathing, and coughs up a great quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
And if one has a fracture, they say that one should eat foods that bloat the belly, to force out the broken bone.
We do not make hot poultices unless an abscess is already there. And if it is there, then we cleanse it.
And some say that one should place leeches on the site to draw out pus, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the leech will attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
And some say that one should cover the place with soft wool soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the area around even, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone pointing through the bandage, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split above the site of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to ward off the infection; and then one should cut the bone and gently pull, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and bandage it with poultices until it heals. And if hot abscesses arise, then place moistened fabrics in rose oil on the site, and while treating the area where the abscess is, let the patient lie carefully on his side, until he is healed.
about the fracture of the neck:
Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention to whether his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in many conditions, and if he is mute and feels well when one presses and pricks him, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the ailment will be cured if treatment is applied.
And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention to whether his feet are soft, and whether the signs are in his hands, and there is windiness and urination without willing it; and when he is pressed on his belly, there is urination without willing it. And when he is pressed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortally ill: do not labor in his treatment.
And if these signs do not occur, the condition is more mild.
And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, one should cover it with the palm of one's hand; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', put your thumb in your left hand, and place it equally in your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage on top, if you need to; then bind it tightly, and if there are bones dislocated, do the same, then remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Sometimes the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight shrinking at the head; and it will bend to one side, and the patient feels pain in that spot, and there will be a point and swelling where it is broken.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the fracture; and you know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put that fracture in line with the rest of the bone so that it is in a natural shape.Et si la brisure est au pardedens soulement, si met cele sus le chief tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.
And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on his stomach until the setting of that fracture is prepared. And when you have set it straight, then apply the plaster, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the linen under the rib cage until the fracture is healed.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are soothed, and apply what we have described earlier; then return to the healing process, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome; and that is the method.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a rod straight and smooth, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with ropes and raise them up, and seat the patient on a chair; then let him gently hang his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and have a curve in the rod, then let him lean back onto something heavy or let his ministers hold him down; then let his assistants bring the broken joint together as evenly as possible, so that the joint returns to its proper place.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then let one minister hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other minister hold below at the end of the rod, and each pulls their respective ends.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then press down on one side under the fracture and up on the other, and stretch each of the joints in their direction. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then you should put a light bandage underneath the shoulder pad, and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and also, if the fracture is towards the neck, a light bandage should be placed gently without labor, so that the fracture is even both in place and on the neck; then adjust the fracture as it should be, and press it, if no hot abscesses come.
And if hot abscesses come, do not tighten it for 7 days; then put cool linen in vinegar and rose oil on the hot abscesses until they are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then raise the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put a cloth, and press onto the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its natural place, unless something keeps it from being so, or if the bone is displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and put a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, with a space of two fingers between each splint, and let each splint be as long so that it passes the fracture by three inches on each side; then tighten onto the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more firmly and less in moving away.
And if you see the seating of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the binding every three days, so that itching nor swelling come to the spot, nor the growth come to the member because it is too tight. Then release it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then unbind it after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the shoulder one cushion full of wool equally, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, nor the binding become soft; then release it by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously mentioned, so that the food is in the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be healed within 40 days; then one should unbind it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the spot. And if the constriction is bad and swollen, let it remain bound for 1 or 2 months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "bone-pair"; one is small and lies beneath the armpit, and the other is large and lies beneath the small bone; sometimes only the large bone breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When only the small bone is broken, its restoration and healing are easy; but when only the large bone is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the small bone that is broken, then one should gently extend and straighten it.
And if it is the large bone, then one must pull harder; and extend the arm on .1. cushion, and raise the armpit of the hand higher than the other, and the small bones lower than the other bones, and have the patient cross his arms over his chest, and place .1. cushion in front of him so that he does not suffer any strain; then extend the minister's arm above the part under his hand, or to .1. ligament, and another minister at .1. the other above. Then one should straighten the member according to its best form.
And if in the breaking there are pieces, one places each in its place, and if there is any dislocation that pinches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then split it along the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken singularly about it in this chapter; then take the cure.
And if at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a dressing of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay a dress over it subtly, until the hot abscess is relieved. And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with egg albumen, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be a little stronger and larger than the others; and understand that he must have six bandages on his arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes by, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the thread with which he is being bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And change the bandages and the sling after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes on it, then you must wet the member with warm water until those itches are relieved; and let the member not be bound but rest. And then resume the binding, and if the bandages are softened and the bones separated, and anything like that, then dress it again.
And if you see that the nourishment cannot come to the member because it is too bound, then you must soften it a little, and leave it thus for several days, until the nourishment runs to it, and then tighten it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days have passed; then let him keep his hands on his neck, and let his neck remain even, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the composition and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from bending many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should stretch his arm out straight in front of him evenly; then he should put his hand on the ground, and stretch out the broken bones, and put them back together evenly, the minister, as far as the injury extends; and if there are no abscesses, then put on a plaster and bandages; then wrap it in a single linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a bandage of rags, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken plant; then squeeze it with a long strip of cloth, and let the mark of the finger be as large as the palm of the hand, and squeeze it as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the arm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as it should be and then squeeze the hand, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture and keep it from moving; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it with the finger next to it; or bind them all together while holding it steady, or you can put a splint on top of the finger like a thumb; take care in the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that arises as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when they bend forward and backward; and their healing is by binding one band above the fracture, and another below. And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band equally to their respective parts; and this is how it is done when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the fracture. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the band should be beyond the knee, and the extension should be downward; then place the splints so that the bone is aligned with its natural shape, and then apply the poultice and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
And if the patient has a hot abscess, then let it subside and then return to your treatment and care; the bandage is done in the following way. You should wrap a bandage around the fracture, a thick one folded in half or two layers, and leave it loose, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the nail, and thread a long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the string come up above; then turn the bandage over the leg and thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the binding even, then start to tie it firmly in three or four places around the fracture; as you go higher above the fracture, make the binding looser; then take hold of the two ends of the string that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie the three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the string, so that it comes under the foot; tighten it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like that until any swelling or bruising goes down and no new ones appear.
And if something happens, then loosen it and adjust what has happened, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that are poking out, they should be removed if possible; if not, the area should be split open and drained, and the wound treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, when restored in this way, it does not harm the patient.
And you should know that the neck is restored within a day, or less or more, depending on the different complexions.
of the groove of the knee
You should know that in the groove of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a split, or an opening, and it happens with all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels good.
And the restoration is to put it back in place with tweezers, as long as he can; then put on the ointment, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions that we have given for other fractures, such as a hot abscess and similar; then treat each incident as appropriate, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "mustelz" and the other the "foscile"; and all manner of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Then administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and ease it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, then take two wooden splints that prop up the leg on either side, and let them be as long as from the knee to below; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, made of wood, and they put the leg upon it to guard against movement, and properly do they treat that in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
of bone fracture at the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes there is a bone fracture at the foot and in two ways, and there is no more force than that in many positions.
And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see the bones on top of one another, then put the foot of the patient on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two flat sides underneath the belly of the foot, then bind it to the foot securely, and then wrap cloth and other materials around it as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there is a broken bone in the toe, then set it as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider, then place underneath the foot that small board I mentioned earlier, and tighten it securely; and if there are one or two, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already discussed; and treat each incident as it should be treated.
from the fracture of the bone in the shoulder
When the bone of a woman's shoulder is broken, have her sit with her back bent forward and held from behind. Then fill the wound with cotton, placing pieces as large as an egg inside it; then make the woman stand up and gently twist her back from side to side, causing the cotton to move within the wound until the bone has moved back into place. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. You may also take a goat's bladder, attach a tube to its opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is swollen. This will cause the bone to return to its proper place. Then fill the wound with cotton and leave it there for several days until it has healed.
And when the bone of the shoulder in either a man or woman is broken, treat it as we have described for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who give it their attention and follow my instructions in this book. For the breaks show us the correct path to healing in many ways; so listen to them.
For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it with cloth and leave it for three days, checking on it daily, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
One who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the fracture of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should be treated now, as the bleeding we have described attests.
And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses appear.
And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, waiting for the abscesses to subside; do not touch or treat them on the third or fourth day, for you would risk causing a harmful incident.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, then you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not apparent to you for putting it in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to cut a three-inch or four-inch piece, depending on how much he needs for each fracture treatment; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the affected limb during your work, and narrow in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «palainche», so that the curved head of the bone should be placed on the visible end of the bone; and bend it once, as far as it will go, and make it even with the other one. And if the fracture is fine, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you should cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
And if you cannot put the bone back in place as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then do thus that it may be in its place: moisten a cloth with black, styptic wine, and apply it neatly if it is on the shoulder; and put nothing on the wound with grease, so that pus and corruption will come; then administer this when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding; and many times fools have done this and brought about death or corrosion on the patient. And let the binding be softer and looser than other bandages.
And if the wound is large or deep and you doubt that an evil accident will come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the spot, then do not put anything over the wound; but wrap around, instead of the bandages, hard rags, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days that pus is coming out of the wound, remove what you have put over it altogether, and apply ointment to heal wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon ointment and similar ones.
And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and cured.
And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone in there causing the pain. So you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all those broken pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption develops in the wound, then it should be treated as described earlier in this chapter. If the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not touch it, for often death can occur; instead, leave it alone until it scabs over, perhaps after 20 to 30 days, then clean the wound if possible, and if not, leave it.
of bruises that come upon the healing
Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there is an ugly appearance to the limb; and often the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the nose is swollen: use astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar others, grind them up and mix with wine or egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril as a poultice, hold it tightly in place for several days, then remove it and start again until the swelling is gone; or tie it with a well-fitting piece of plaster, for the property of the plaster is to draw out all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut away the top and open up the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon so that it is removed, and then heal it.
When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and frail, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weak.
And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and leisure; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and often wash it with tepid water, until the swelling goes down to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
then the limb becomes straight after health
When the limb is crooked after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or soft herbs should be cooked, such as leaves of comfrey, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and one makes .a softening ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and one takes the mucilage of comfrey, and mixes it with tallow of cow's milk or oil of hempseed, and applies it to the affected area; or one takes fat figs, and grinds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is eased by continuously rubbing and massage with moist hands. And movement should be encouraged in the limb every hour.
And if the twistiness is awake and hardened, as in stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put cotton and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, one should immediately reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the area will swell and if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. Therefore, one should not move it during the time that it is swollen as this can often bring on spasms and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this happens, if the patient bleeds, then let him, so that the abscesses will be soothed; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and heal each member as the healing comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the mandibles
Then the jaws are dislocated downward, and both dislocations have two types: they are slightly pulled out of place and slightly softened, or they are completely dislocated and hang down, with saliva dripping from the mouth that cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped in speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can be resolved with various treatments.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly without delay.
and in such a way that the operator holds the head of the patient and pushes his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if it is on one side; and the other two hands are free to apply pressure evenly. He instructs the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
And she looks at it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is stuck, especially when it's the two jaws together, then heat them with hot water and oil, until you reset them lightly; do not twist at all in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then put on damp cloth in rosin ointment made from oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor struggle at all, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are bound.
and then eat what he wants easily, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come about, and perhaps stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and often the person it happens to dies within eight days.
of the fork
The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the rib cage within its range of motion, nor from the foot; it is sometimes dislocated in a fall, and this is easily felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly;
and the shoulder joint which is near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does, and if it sometimes returns to place, then reset it as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and likewise is the shoulder joint of the spine reset when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways. One of these is that it dislocates at the part of the acromion below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, but this rarely happens.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the acromion, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it is very forceful; but in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates gently, and returns gently.
And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
And a dislocation is understood to be when it is lower down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the touch;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if children are affected.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand upward, then place your fists underneath the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upward into its proper position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this should bring quick relief.
And if it does not come back into place within a few days as we have described, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and soothing and softening ointments should be applied, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and milkweed in water, and the affected area should be massaged.
Then the patient should lie on their back, and a layer of lamb's wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath the shoulder joint; then the assistant lifts the heel onto the sto, and pulls up on the head of the shoulder gently, while pulling down on the affected hand.
and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see it dislocated again, reset it according to this method.
and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; he should stand straight toward the armpit of the patient, push up under the shoulder joint from below, and lift the shoulder joint upward, so that the patient hangs in the air by his arm. and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can use a heavy object, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it can also be reset in another way: one should stick a long stake into the ground so that the head is at the same height as a finger, and not too big or too small. then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should stand for a long time; then the hand should be extended downward on the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, which has a handle for ease of use, and insert it under the joint according to this shape:
then tie it to the top of the brand with soft cloth so that the brand does not hurt the patient, then place it under the joint of the patient; and extend the arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the brand, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a wooden board, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you should then place a sphere of wool equal in size under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster with powdered millstone, incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around it, then tighten it under the joint gently, and tie the string over the plaster, and hug the hand to your chest, and let the hand remain like this.
And one should eat little, as long as the limbs are being healed, because they will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔軟, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come to it, or for any other reason, then you should apply cauteries to 3 openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint doesn't hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly aligned.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are caused by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat it until it is healed.
And if after healing, there is cracking in the limb, and over time with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until that cracking is relieved and returns to its original nature.
about dislocation of the neck
You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated everywhere, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the neck of the patient with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as any abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form there, it would be difficult to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death ensues.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands be bent according to the elbow, around, over, and under, and push the joint to his armpit together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he bends his hand to his hand and presses from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and one minister bends the arm, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a long, double drapeil;
and when the surgeon examines a joint in his hand, he should grease it with oil to soften the joint, then bend it back into place so that it heals.
and when it is in place, he should apply a dry poultice with egg white, then bend it firmly, and bind the arm to the collar of the patient, leaving it for several days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen the binding and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, repeat the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place and it moves, then bathe and massage him gently, and press until he is relieved; you can also put a fat lamb's snow on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and have him enter the bath. And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the bandage, and then enter the bath; and do this 1 or 2 times until he is healed; and if you see [any improvement], place warm cow's milk mixed with butter on top, and hold it in place; then it will return to its normal state.
dislocation of the hand
When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints, nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, provided that the place is swollen or that a hot abscess has formed there.
And the method of putting it back into place is to have the sick person lie on a table, and extend his hand, and look at it and put it in line, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in its proper place; then have the patient lie on his back on a table, extending and bending his arm. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient lie on his back on the table, and the examiner place his hand over that appearance at the joint. If it now goes back into place, that is good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to soothe abscesses, and leave it like that without re-examining it.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted;
and does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is weak and cannot extract anything at all; then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is nothing else to do but to cauterize near the wound, and by chance nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster we have described, then straighten it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any cracking, moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.Et s’il advenist que li nerfs fuent copez, si ne puet movoir li membres, si le met sus l’emplaustre de la piere fendeit, et li frotte sus li nerfs tant qu’il soit sanez; car il ne peut sanz nerf.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times, they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes on the back of the palm or the underside;
then pull at the fingers and bring the dislocation back into place, then hold the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it be for two days, and then put it in place that same day; and don't lie down at night as we have said, but stay up during the day, make it move, and then lie down again. Do this frequently until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated on the underside of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere.
from the dislocation of the neck
When the neck or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly.
And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, and one cannot hold it back; many times a limb, or both legs, or an arm, or one leg, become paralyzed.
And many times the neck becomes paralyzed in four parts; that which is paralyzed at the back is called "paralysis":
The cure is to determine if the disease has its origin in childhood; if not, there is no cure or healing for it.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of curing by great words, it has not brought much benefit in all cases.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the disease that comes from the feet forward, there is no healing or health.
and also one who comes straight from both sides, and cannot be healed except by him who properly comes from the back, as I say;
and let the patient stretch his face forward equally on both sides, and let him keep still under him so that he does not move;
then insert a brand into the head of the patient in the ground, and another under his feet, and tie a string underneath the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and let two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two brands;
and let them be well closed, the brand as we have said, and let the patient place his palms on the spine until it straightens.
And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board three yards long, and cut under the skin, and let the patient lie on his side, and insert the end of the board under the skin, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the patient place his feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it is straightened out; and if you see that it happens in the joint that turns to the hand, do it there.
And you should insert two brands at the head of the patient's arm, and two more near his feet, with a space of about a palm between each brand;
and have in each stake a hole, where the thread will turn around, and firmly drive the stakes into the ground so that they do not move; and between every two stakes there should be one turning stake, over which the thread turns, and between two turning stakes there should be two small stakes of the length of a palm, for the thread to turn around;
and then tie the thread which is among the stakes to the turner at the head, and the other thread to the feet at the other turner, and each of the ministers turns their turner all the way along the thread, and the master puts the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is equalized, then put on a drying plaster with an egg white, and then the bandages, and then the pillow of a tablet three fingers long, which purples the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a thread as we have said, and use the sick person with subtle care until they are healed.Et quant il sont sanez, si li maistres met sus la partie de l’espondile qu’el est sainne emplaustre umectatif, et li ministres tornent li tornet, si com nos avons dit, et lou maistres qui li tien le chief et les piez, et li ministres qui li tient le corps entre les bras, qui ont li tornet devers la partie qu’il a sainne, si remuient li corps en l’estele tant qu’il se puet mover,
And when they are healed, then the master puts a moistening plaster on the healthy part of the spine, and the ministers turn their turners as we have said, and the master who holds the head and feet, and the ministers who hold the body between their arms with the turners towards the healthy part, move the body in the pillow as much as it can be moved,and if anything comes in the end of healing, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the pillow we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster
and sometimes it appears in the last vertebrae of the back, and one believes that it is a dislocation; but it is the bone which appears, so one must not have any presumptions about it: by chance it could bring about death.
of hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only become dislocated, and do not become so like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is healing according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and a little healed in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee is more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over fire; and the area which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from within, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of him to whom it happens from the front, are that his leg is well according to their accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no treatment; and it must not be allowed to become presumptuous.
And for that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four manners of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and does not need any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a very strong bandage, and stretch the leg very firmly with two hands, or with one tied around the knee; and another bandage stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his shoulders, then the tightens a leather thong around the thigh; and another tightens a leather thong around his head;
and extend both upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains pendant.
This manner of extension is common to the four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, one must apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should press upon the patient's healthy side, then place the ligature over the root of the thigh and the part beneath the armpit, then extend the ligature upward toward the armpit and the arm;
then grasp another minister's arms and embrace the large part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is more minor than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner which we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong woolen bandage over the two heels and over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let him be hung from the top of a post, and let him be two arms' length above the ground; then command one assistant to grip the head of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, gripping the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is restored, let the patient lie as we have said for those with rigidity, and bind one bandage tightly on the affected leg, and another on the foot as well.
Then put two hot embers, one on the head and one on the foot, then insert a hot ember between the thighs in the form of a V. and has moist bandages placed around it so that it does not bleed, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant holds steady, making sure the dislocation is aligned with his hand.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put the patient on a table and press it as we have said in the section on dislocations, and lay him on his unaffected side.
And when the dislocation is forward, one must extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant must put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward, one must not extend the affected side downward or lift it up off the ground, but it must be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on one's side with both hips. and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint on the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then restrain it as before and let him rest for 3 days, then release the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his chest, and place his foot upon your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull gently between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and have another minister extend his foot while you pull the knee gently back into place; the sign that it is returned to its place is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily.
And apply the plaster and make the leg bend at the thigh, and hold it together tightly for three or four days, then release it; and the patient should not walk until the limb is healed.
And if the member is not healed, then administer strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
And its signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it feels sore at the place where it is dislocated:
the movements should be gentle, and one should gently straighten out the elbow with their hand when it is only strained.
And when it is dislocated from all sides, one should make the patient sit upright, and hold them by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards and press the foot firmly upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that is good; if not, then restart the operation, for it will go back in.
and if it cannot go back in like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push a stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie blankets around him so he does not move;
then one assistant pulls the leg at the knee, and another assistant stretches the foot out at his hands or with a cord, so that it is stretched out straight; then each assistant pulls equally, and the stake should be pushed further between the buttocks of the patient to hold him in place as he is stretched;
then let the surgeon hold the dislocation steady with his hands, and have an assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place quickly.
And when it is in place, then put the bandage and padding on top, and press it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, taking care not to bind the nerves behind the ankle too tightly;
then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, then tighten it; then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and the patient may go about their business in four days. and if he goes before that time, it is not safe that he does not relapse again.
And if painful abscesses arise, you must calm them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the armpit
When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without strain, and that is an easy matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the shoulder or foot, you should have the patient lie on his back on a flat surface or table, completely straight, and place his foot on something that applies pressure to the joints, then press firmly on the foot until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to heal it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not experienced in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not wise, compassionate, and slow to act, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the dislocated joint so that the hot abscesses can heal.
and when the dislocated joint is reset, then administer hot poultices to soothe the abscesses and treat the wound with drying ointments.
and if there is a fracture with broken bones, then follow the instructions given in the section on simple fractures.
and keep yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for that will lead you astray according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body. Amen.
