O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it with its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete this treatise for you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work by hand is treated in our region and is strange from all over, it is a worthy science and appropriate, and it is not delayed from the fire more than the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distant.
Or me seems that I shall add to it the order of this healer in accordance with the path of exposure and statement and abbreviation; and will come together with the shapes of the tools for cauterization, and other instruments for the work, with the adjustment of the statement and preparation of it, as is fitting.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for him who deals with it to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the shapes and connections and separations of the vessels, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and rest of the joints, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason it is said that nothing is with the good, and without the bad, and with work there is danger; and most of all in the art of hands.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with the above mentioned things, let him beware that he does not err and harm others; so that I have often wanted many of those who meddle in this science and who abandon themselves to theory and not to experience.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who caught a stone from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took it out with him and killed himself in three days.
And I have also seen him called to pull out a stone from the bladder of a woman, and I saw the appearance of the disease and the size of the stone; and if he had pulled it out, he would have died.
And see another mirth who took in cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound. And the mirror plain of ignorance draws out the break on the wound with very strong medicine, leaving no scar to the wound, and leaves it thus.i. finished; and he commanded that he did not unfasten it at all; and delayed so that his leg was completely gone and the toes came to destruction.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all ways of corruption were confirmed in him or his member, and he could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to go away by the member until the members were completely lost.
And see another mirth who broke apart.i. abscess that was infected, and then set it on fire with the evil of his lordship.
For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholic humor, it must only be touched with iron if it is not in its natural place so that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And for this reason, good son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into 1.2 divisions: that is to say, work in which there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, you must guard yourself so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your arms in confidence, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galleons gives some of his admonitions: "Do not take on as your own work the healing of a sick person unless you are called to do so."
I have devised this treatise according to II. chapters.
The first chapters are on fire cautery and water-based medicine, and the order of the limbs; and the forms of instruments, and the iron instruments for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are on cutting and piercing, and sucking out wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the order of the chapters and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; and it prescribes the use of a pole for support up to the hip, and the shape of tools.
Thus, we remember the work; it is necessary that I explain the quality of help and the harm of each complexio
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and its reply hidden; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree with it; and I am lacking in words, for I shorten them.
I say that fire is helpful to all complexions when it has matter; otherwise, it is not. That is to say, a complexio
In warm and dry complexions together the matter, no one devised and said that cautery is great help; and another said the opposite: that cautery does not deserve to be used for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used by hot disease caused by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man with his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it never by experience.
And any path, does not interfere but that who has experienced it, and who knows by long practice the use of the cautery paste, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the remedies and the space of time; we do not fear others' complexions, nonetheless with cold and moist illnesses. And all that should be gathered and agree to the cautery.
And know, children, that combined fire cautery is more effective than hot medicine in treating secrets and many other illnesses.
For fire is simple, and comes not forth except to the limb which it burns, and harms no other member so much.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by removal, and bring disease of harm to the member for cure; and perhaps they cause illness.
Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not cause heat, unless there is an excess.
And I have found this by experiment and because of the length of my service and of the study that I have employed in this art, and it is based on the veracity of things; and therefore I ask forgiveness for the length of speech, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret which is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating; take it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at a certain time, and they should be performed while praying.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful effects that may arise due to the help of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until the time when greater harm may come upon the member.
And I do not think at all, son, as they do so foolishly; for when a disease is cured by cauterization, there is no return to the former state; and that is how it should be done; but it is not like what they think; for cauterization is only medicine that changes the appearance, drying up the humors which cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of speed of action, and due to its excellence and dignity.
And one may choose that the disease never returns according to the appearance of the illness and its place and virtue; and superfluities are gathered in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things; unless cauterization is administered at the right time when there is little surplus and moisture, as is done for pain, and for similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
And many people do not hear for the reason that the remedies are called the derrières of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that the remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and these are the derrières of medicine because when we administer ways to cure in no disease and they are not worth it, then let us administer the remedy, and it is worth it. Now, although remedies are the derrières of medicine, do not hear them according to the intentions of foolish people.
The ancients used to say that a gold-based remedy is more effective than one made of iron, and they only spoke about the quality of gold and its high value; they said that the edges of remedies do not cause inflammation, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that in certain people they do; and a gold remedy is more effective than an iron one, as they used to say.
And wherever you heat gold-based instruments, you will not be able to tell if they are too hot or not just by their color, and they can quickly cool down; and if you heat them too much, they will burn on the fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or you should read this chapter up to the part about the eye, so that it is easier for you to find.
The olive oil cautery
The olive oil cautery is useful for the head, especially for the brain, and for the ears. It also helps with many ailments, including those caused by cold, such as paralysis, sodom, and apoplexy; and it can also help with pain in the dens and throat, and with many other diseases caused by cold.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solitive medicine which purifies the head.iii. times or iiij., according to what the virtue and the eagerness and the acostumance of the patient can bear; and then do again the head of the patient.
And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called "olivaire", from which comes this form:
And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called "olivaire", from which comes this form:
And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called  "olivaire", from which comes this form:
And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much of the bone that it is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And another said that one must let the cautery burn so much of the bone, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured; and that one must open the wound very wide, as women put in their needles to cause the humors to come out; and it must be kept open for a long time; after it must be cured and dressed.
And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases; for in some men where there is a tendency to pain; and I believe that I should let it burn; for the head bone is weakened by continuous solutions due to nature, as we witness with other limbs; and even when the head bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems more safe and milder to me, and so I use it in the assembly in all cases.
of the ancient pain of the head
When in all the head comes chronic pain and lasts a long time, then you must use the yeris of the patient and pills which are called "cochie", and head purgation and oils and poultices; and if one does the fire cautery which we have just said, and it is not good.
Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have said above.
After making the fire cautery on each horn of the head, as we have said above, and making the "vasselz" cautery where one puts the leeches; and it is good that you hold your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: The patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is good that the cornes cauterizes be more subtle than those of which one makes the cautery of the head's moieneteit, and this is the form:
For the cautery of the head. When in one part of the neck comes sudden pain, and is spread to the oil, and the head is purged with medicines mondifian, and other cures have been done that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: then make cauterizes according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicine water and fire.
When the medicine water cautery does not work, take a piece of almond wood, and cut off the bark and the top, and then make two holes in it, and then put on cotton plunged in oil until it dries out.
After the medicine ointment has been applied until it is well, and if you see that some of the medicine burners that I have written or treated with medicines burners do not work.
The fire cautery if it is according to this way: Heat the cauterizer in which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
And called "close" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or there is .i. poc corbeure, and in the middle with a small appearance; and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly a little, until half of the keur's flesh is burned; and release your hand that the artery does not burn, which is old, and runs an abundance of blood.
de emigraine
When you cure the emigraine as we have said in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery before spoken of is taken from the medicine and of the iron does not sufice to it; then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign as soon as a half-inch line is drawn on the painful spot, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come to the mandible when it is swallowed, and that the muscle does not move when it is moved, and you guard against the pain of the blood that comes from the artery when it is covered, or coming with great fear to those who do not know it, and who are students and experienced; and leave the work in half a line; but I will tell you how to stop the pain when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it affects in this book.
And if you see that this fire cautery does not suffice to the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize him in his head also as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery, with a cautery that has .ij. tools; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
about pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ears occurs due to cold, and one has applied the soluable medicines and other cures we mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, then apply this fire cautery, which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
After applying fire to the entire ear that is painful, including the .ij. points where the pain persists in both ears, and then moving away from the ear's root a little towards its tip; make .x. points on each ear; then cure the area until it heals.
of the mouth torture
torture which must be cured by fire is only good for those that move because of fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use fire on similar things that come from sweat and dander of dogs.
When you cure this similarity of torture that moves because of fluid from the head and gargling, and this is not good, so it is worth that you burn the disease with .iij. cauterizes: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further away in the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the fire on the part that is healthy, and make the fire on the head of the ear from a little point at the tip of the head, and another also far away; and leave the fire burning until half of the burn is done; and this is the form of the fire:
And is the form of the scalpel that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is worth that the blade is a little thicker; after curating the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
Here is the translation of the text:
"of argilla"
"For this disease, give the patient large pills and medicinal oil to the brain; then place the paste on his head, using sage oil, which is written or used to make plasters; and this is the way of the cautery: if you do so as I have said."
"If he is well thus, it is good; and if not, make 13 cauterizations of the oil on his head going down to his collar, and space between each cauterization of .iij. two; and treat as before, and if he farts or makes noise, and the patient suffers, make 1 cauterization in the middle; and the art is, 2 others on the two horns, and treat as long as he is well; and let the cauterizations which are called 'olive', be made as I have said before."
of the cold of the cold to be cleansed from years and from what we have said before; after rinsing the head of the patient, then you do fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then you do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and he leaves them until the two corners are burnt, and you raise your hand; after curing until it is healthy, and the cautery which is called "olive" that we have said before.
of epilepsy
of epilepsy It is important for those who are experiencing seizures to first cleanse the brain from years of illness and from other cures that we have mentioned in the chapter when the patient is suffering greatly and severely from medication.
And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate the fire, they make him gargle and chew bone meat often; after that, they put his head between their knees, and do as I have said above, and also do cauterization on his neck and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, they do cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the neck, on the spine of the back and on the neck, and make the cauterization olive according to the way that I have said.
If the patient is a child, they do a subtle cauterization according to this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moisture and thick fluid, then the fire cauterization that we have said to one who has paralysis:
And if due to melancholy there is a decline in melancholy and the patient's neck is moist, then he drinks something that clears his mind, according to what it is above in the division.
After having washed the head of the sick person; then make 1 . i . a tortoiseshell made of fine linen, also like a circle, and place it on the head; and the sick person should lie with his face down, and be held fast from all sides; then present the ointment, and moisten it with old butter; and the fire must be gently heated so that the sick person can bear it; then empty the shell through the opening in the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good government, until he is well.
Or if you wish to cauterize him by making many punctures all over the body. This way of cauterizing moistens the skull evenly; and then cotton soaked in butter and oil is put on.
of the eyes When the first signs come as I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying thing the head, and guarding from all moisture, and let him sweat or bathe many times while he is fast.
After he orders to touch his head again, and has it cauterized, and has .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples where it is separated from the ear in one place, and in another where it is separated in one ear; and covers all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are spread out, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care that there is no blood going out, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, then stop him from bleeding by putting on as much as he can.
And I will teach you how to cauterize the arteries and incise in order to stop the bleeding; and never do you make a cautery or an incision on the 2 bones behind.
the two courses of tears
For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in appearance like the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and damp superfluities, therefore he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the ear descending to the eyes: 1. cauterize the head, and 2. cauterizes on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizes where he haters the bones; and if it is necessary more, if the cauterize well on the sill above all small cauterize.
how to make a wound dry quickly
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: 2. times the wine; after he takes the chief, and makes cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and makes
2. times the wine; after he takes the chief, and makes cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and makes
And if you see this, make .iij. cauterizes on the .iij. sores so long as the hairs are; and do not let the hand go forth unless until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
the hair that points oil No time has come when the hair of the oil is converted to the parched land, and strikes the oil, and it is done on cauterizes according to 2 ways: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
When they are born and even, then put the patient on your chest; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the feather of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign of the delicate hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and muskillaige of persillion on oil, then heat the cautery where there is this form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the burn is in the right place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand, and leave it there for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as the burn is hot; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is soft then start again the cautery on the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and even, and does not touch the hair of the oil.
The medicinal hot cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the feather of mirth; then take French soap and live heat, each one 2z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the feather of mirth, and put it on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease holds in 1 oil only, so must he operate in 1 also, and if in both; and put cotton wet in wax When you have done this for some time, if your pain persists, then take the medicine with your food. When the medicine has worked, then raise your arm, and if you see the pulse rise again as though it had been raised by fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then put more of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your hair is long and even; then put cotton in the wound with a little oil until the burn has healed, after which cure the wounded place which is called "diane," and other places, until it is well.
And if you have hair on your arm that needs to be treated with great care so that the medicine does not cause it to fall out. And if the cotton becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then begin again with the medicine on the same place where the cotton has become soft; do this as before; then cure until it is well; and that is the form of the ointment of myrrh:
And know that men's hair is different in length and thickness, and according to what suits you; and do not attempt to apply the same treatment to all, for each person has his own unique needs in this craft.
On the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and dip cotton wicks in oil of rose or juice of pepperwort over oil; then heat the cauterizer; and hold it to the scalp as if in the shape of a feather, together with the tip being the cauterizer; if you see, so point out from one scalp to the other, and if you do not see, so as a tent; but nevertheless, it is necessary that it be held on the scalp.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and then apply fire to the part with oil; put the cauterizer in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin cauterizing again, and if you need more, leave it .iij. days; after i put cotton moistened in oil on the wound, and treat with drying ointment until it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass without being healthy, then put on medicine that corrodes until the bone is exposed; and make a cure according to what has come out in his chapter.
I have a way of cauterizing the fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Know what a fistula is, and open the place; then put in the opening 1/4 pound of very thin caugh, so that it is this form: and i make the quantity of an 1/4 pound; and hold your hand firmly where the caugh is, so that it does not move at all, so that the melted caugh does not run into its oil; and you must put cotton moistened in oil on the wound, at the fistula's opening, and it will be cured by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, you must pierce the nose, and bring back the fistula to the nose's own place.
of the fissures in the lips the mouth of times have coming fissures in the lips which are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not profit, then heat .i. a small fire-cauterizer according to this form:
And place it directly in those fissures until it comes out clean; after the cure, apply the cauterizer again until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes up to the root of the throat or palate or roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, but it does no good: then it is necessary that you have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes up to the base of it, and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the base and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the disease in your mouth; after heat the cautery so that its shape will come out as you put a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after release your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; after fill the mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour and rinse it thoroughly.
And in this way, those who were moving are made to stand still, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and腐敗した。
of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or it is cold in the mouth, and medicines have no effect, then it is necessary to use one of two methods of treatment: fire cautery and butter cautery.
Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip into a wooden or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and place it on the toothache carefully until it cools down; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become moist with the butter, and place it on the toothache, and place the bronze or iron tip hot as much as the fire comes to the top of the tooth.
The fire cautery together if it is such that you squeeze a ring of iron or of rain, and be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick; after heat the cauterizer, for from this it will take shape then, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand as long as the cautery is cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be increased that day or the next. And it comes that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterizer, and then he rages fire; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofula is of cold and moist heat, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the head cauterizer so that here after comes the form, and has ij. openings for the fumes to come out at the head of the cauterizer; and put the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or ij. it is necessary, until it comes to the source of the abscess; and let it sit there with cotton wet in butter until the burning is done; then cure the affected area with onions and tents until it is well.
When the moisture conquers on the cheeks and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be cleansed with soluble medicines; after that, make cauterization at the root of the throat, and keep yourself from going any further down the throat, but only a little. After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterizations, which are called "clavicles", give us the shape before; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
from the toast When all and disease are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an ancient disease, then you must make ij cauterizations on the forelegs in their eyes; and another cauterization spill milk between two breasts; and let the cauterizations, which are called "clavicles", according to the shape that is before stated.
And if you see, make cauterization in piercing all the cauterizations which are called "poins" from which the form is here before in the disease of the ears; and let the piercings go up to .iii., or so enter. After that, heal the place according to what is before said, and let the cauterizations be at .iii. rains according to this form:
And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it with two hands.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, treat the pain on his back and sides; then place your right hand over the spot where the hot iron is placed; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the iron for the second time. Here is the form:
and cauterize with fire as long as it pierces up to the cost, and the figure of the cautery together comes; iiij. cauteres; and for this one is made cauterization with the cautery which has .iij. ners, so that the figure of cauterization are .sis cauteres; and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of cautery who has .iij.
And never is set on this 1 nerve so that there are 6 cauterizes.
Then put on the fire cautery; grind with it the salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated from above, let there be a hole; then make a cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in piercing. For the jointure is closed, and the moisture is osseous and heals the patient.
dou cautere de pleuresin
dou cautere de pleuresin
Et no ancient ones said that any man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and scuffs it and puts it between the ribs, until he reaches the lung; and he gasps for breath, as we have said in the chapter on the lung. But in this work there is doubt and fear, and many die, or a fistula comes which can never be healed.
de la mice
When you cure the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to perform cauterization, all of which are good.
Of these three ways, one is so that you do 3.3 cauterizations, or iiij., according to the length of the mouse's body, according to the shape of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization at once, and leave the patient sore on his back;
And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has 2 ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and bring the cautery which is on the side of the mouse, where the cut comes from left to right, and raise the cautery according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the breadth of the body.
After that, heat the 2 ners of the cautery until the cut is visible from the other side, and then quickly bring the cautery; and thus you will have done 3. And if you see, then cauterize all of the cauterization at once with 3 ners. After the cure, when it has been heated for a long time, and this is enough to heal the other cure that we have said before.
from drop
from dropsy
After the cauterization is finished, leave it uncovered for a long time to prevent any return of the fever, and do not continue the cure after the cauterization; and the healing would speed up, and both the 2 intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key we have before us; and that for the back is olive-colored, according to what it is described here before.
of the swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in a person with gout and they turn yellow, you should burn on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and hold your hand away from the fire without turning it too much. And don't enter too much deeply, lest the fire turn yellow, and do the burning according to this form:
After doing so on.ij. legs  .ij. cauterizes on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let the cauterize burn long on the leg, one before the knee and the other behind, as you walk; and leave the cauterizes in place for a long time without washing, that the fire go out; after doing so to the other cures we have said.
of the palace
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest are present in the stomach and in the intestines, it cannot be cured by any manner of cure; and you will see the patient very sick and of great virtue, so do this. i. 3. cauterize the stomach according to what he has spoken about here before or cauterize the stomach, circled; and 2. 3. cauterize inside the buttocks gently up to all i. cauterize nailed, and 1. cauterize on the hips.
And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the knuckle, and 1. cauterize each toe, and 2. small cauterizes on the stomach of delight, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
from the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are cured if we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, so cauterize: 1.3 on the spine of the back, that which is all through the buttocks little by little and in triancing, and 1. cauterize the butts. 2. two;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled down and the meat is not cooked, and one can see the face swell, then let there be a great cauterization over the stomach, as it has been said above, and another over the liver, and another over the heart with all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain uncovered for a long time. After treating the wound until it is healed.
of the necrosis which is called "thelus"
When you cope to the necrotic tissue, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire over that necrotic tissue; and leave it so that your hand can hold the cautery until the vein is born, from which it is cut; do this once or twice, and if there is any more necrosis, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery over the necrotic tissue, it will provide greater aid.
of a badly cured wound
When the patient cannot tolerate a wound or incision, we will tell you in detail how to treat it so that it can be healed by cauterization.
When there is a fistula, and it becomes inflamed and oozes pus and moisture, if you apply a subtle test all around, and be sure that you know exactly how much it extends: Then heat the cautery which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the test has entered, and start the cautery again as long as the pus and corrupt matter are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of the test; and be careful about the nerves which are in there, and do not cut those large veins. If the fistula goes into the liver or intestine, be careful about these places, and do not cut them except in the charnted place, and think that it is not persistent; afterwards, cure that place as long as it is healthy, and if the matter is dried up, and the bones are exposed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the place is half-healed, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt. And in this way we will tell you about each of these.
from kidney disease When pain in the kidneys comes with a loud noise and strong windiness, and does not respond to female treatment, then you should perform cauterization on the kidneys from one side to the other using the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 3 cauterizations in a line, and they will be even more helpful.
of the bladder when the bladder is weak and weak with cold and moisture so that the patient holds urine, then do a fire cautery on the outside of the bladder, where the hairs of the penis prick, and so on both sides, and each cauterize as long as one finger; and do a cautery behind the back, or as many as you need; and let the cauterizes be clawed according to the shape above mentioned.
of the scrotum when the scrotum is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are late; and when they come, such great pain do they cause: therefore it is necessary that one do 11 cauterizes around the testicles, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and 9 cauterizes behind the back; and let the cauterizes be clawed, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be wet at the end of the department where they are, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at .i. a circle-shaped cautery, and mark in front of the joint around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauteries as those we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present with you, make .iij. cauteries from the large olive, and let the cauterization be perfect like all the others; and heal it until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with large humors of pills made from rotten substances, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the method of the cautery is as follows: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. cauterizations triangular according to this form, and make them deep and broad, and leave between each cauterization a space the size of two, and let them be olive; never do you make a cauterization in the middle on top of the head of the hip, because there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you wish, if the cauterization by the circle that we have just mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it with this way that the circle includes all the hip, and all the depth of the cure is burned.
And this is the way that they do in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach further up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes only as far as the thigh and leg, then you make .ij. cauterizations there where the patient says the pain is, and .i. cauterization on top of the ankle  iiij times, at the edge, and let the cure be burnt; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to his two toes or to the foot, then cauterize it at that place with fire.
Et si tu veux être un bon guérisseur, tu dois faire cela; et s'il fait mal à la hanche vers la cuisse, fais-lui un cautère avec une lame de rasoir ou circulaire, et veille bien sur tous tes instruments pour que tu n'en perdes aucun, ni ne brûles les nerfs et les grosses artères, et ne causes pas au malade beaucoup de tort et de contraction.
And I have seen many who made a cautery on the foot of the leg, and let it go so that the entire leg was drawn in, and also the bones, and was pierced and corrupted all the bones; after which a remedy for the belly brought him death.
Et si le mal est dans les deux jambes, fais un cautère dans l'une et dans l'autre, selon cette méthode. // Et les sages ont dit en la cautère de la cheville, de laquelle ci est la manière, fais un fer ainsi gros comme un ongle de doigt, ou un peu moins, et soit entre les deux chevilles et soit d'un côté entre les chevilles et soit de l'autre côté d'une certaine quantité comme une tête de poce; et soient les entrechetres à l'envers des deux parties, et soient aussi comme des noix, et en ait il 1/2 poce de fer bien fait; et voici la forme:
Et si le mal n'est que dans un membre, fais un cautère d'une manière telle que ci est dit. Et si le mal n'est que dans un membre, fais un cautère d'une manière telle que ci est dit:
Albucasius says that we should use little of this fire cautery because of the danger of the burning, and few people use it; but indeed this is a good cautery, which can be borne, and where it adheres.
of the pain of both sides
When pain comes to the back, either through bending or impact or through excessive evacuation, or through the appearance of expanded cold material, no remedy is appropriate unless it is due to an infusion of cold material.
It is appropriate to treat pain in the back with a remedy that causes nausea and vomiting; this can be done by applying a cold compress to the back where the pain is located, three lines apart from each other. In each line, apply a cauterization according to the strength and quantity of the remedy that the patient can tolerate; and if necessary, apply an additional cauterization using the "knob" cauterization technique. If you are unsure, apply two or three cauterizations according to the strength and quantity of the remedy that the patient can bear; and always use the cauterization knife technique:
Maitre surgeon, I command you to instruct the patient to maintain a tight bandage when he rises, and fear will come upon him; and you shall find in the back of his neck at the base of the spine and in the appearance that comes on top of other spines.
When you see this person and you treat him, if he is burned, cauterize him with fire according to this form.
So that the fire cautery is applied evenly to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery, a line or two, or three, and let them be close together. After treating, until he is well according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in gibbosity which is in the marrow of the nerve.
of the joints
When the pain of the joints comes from moisture that spreads to each limb of the trunk, and when the pain appears in pieces, which they properly call 'podagre', and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by fire cautery in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery follow this form:
When it is necessary to apply the fire cautery to the sole of the foot, then apply the whole fire cautery to all the joints claimed 'point'. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then apply the fire cautery to each knee .iiij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, in all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand firm except for as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery we have spoken about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then apply fire to the base of the fingers 1.ij. lines; and if there is still pain in the two joints or hair on the hand, then apply fire to each joint and to the hair on the hand; and if the pains come up to the shoulders or elbows, then cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and give medicines. For if you do this well and flush out the fluid, then he will be healed with the help of God.
from the rupture of the sinew
When the wound appears in the arm, and the ball-joint falls down on the ground and is just recently, so that when you look at it to heal, he does not get worse that day; and use things that leave your belly open, so that the end descends from your belly; after this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wet his shirt as long as the balls are being mended, and take them in your two hands, and sign with one hand from above the wound on the bone with a knuckle, and make all signs that are like half of a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery for this is the shape:
as long as it is white and has fallen down. Then take the balls to their place; and the minister wet his hand so that he does not turn back; and well work the legs of the sick man, and put him on his .i. cussin and .i. serjant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which Wet his hands; then put the cautery on your sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so you begin again another time until you come to the bone; and beware that the ball does not move when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the sick man does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and that of the great ones also according to their measure; after 3 days heal him with oil as long as he is scorched, after which heal him with other medicines as long as he is healthy, and let the sick man lie 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nurses be rested for a long time, so that the ball does not move when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made girdle, and keep it on for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too much shouting; and when he has done this teaching, let him be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter. For the rupture from the belly
When there are ruptures in other bellies and they are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make 1/3 of the fire for the cauterization according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third corner according to this form:
But the first sign is the beginning of the line and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another below it, and with your thumb press down on all the cauterization. But the first cauters are lighter and less painful.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine for it is not effective, then it should be burned with fire that is called 'poins', and the burn should be made according to the length of the limb, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its location from torments, and its pain. If it heals after one burn, that's good; but if not, then make another burn on top of that one, for such is custom, so that you should make the burns as long as the patient remains ill.
of healing
Here comes the translated text:
Et s'il est dilapider partout, il perd manifestement; si donc tu le cautérises de ces cautères que nous avons dit au chef, et c'est-à-dire un cautère dans son nez, et deux cautères sur la lèvre du cou, et sept cautères sur la colonne vertébrale, et un grand sur la nuque, et une autre délicatesse, et deux sur les épaules, et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur chaque main, et sur les creux des mains; et garde-toi de bruler les nerfs qui sont sous le poignet, de peur qu'ils ne brûlent; et ne fais jamais de cautère sur l'os du poignet, ou sur l'os de la poitrine, ou sur le foie.
And if it is scattered everywhere, it will lose manifestly; so if you cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said to the head, and that is to say, one cautery in his nose, and two cauteries on the lips of the neck, and seven cauteries on the spine, and a great one on the back, and another delicacy, and two on the shoulders, and two on the ribs, and two on each hand, and on the creases of the hands; and keep yourself from burning the nerves that are under the wrist, lest they burn; and do not ever make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or on the bone of the chest, or on the liver. Know that when you make more cauteries, you will do more help, and it will profit you; and know that the patient does not feel the pain of the cautery as much as the healthy one feels it, because his body is already very corrupt. And it should be that the cautery is large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you shall find in a way with iron. After that, cure him with flour of times with honey and other cures until he is well.
de enfleurer
When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, it is not yet healthy, then the fire cautery must be performed on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then let it be oiled until it is healthy. And never is cautery done, with hand or foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the member, so is the swelling osseous; and yet there enters nothing if he knows not the members and exits of nerves moving the body.
de albaras
When the disease called "albaras" is aggravated, and the medicine does not help, then a fire cautery must be performed with a precise cauterizer, according to the amount of flesh around the affected area, until the blight is exposed, and its color changes; then cure it with flour, oil, and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almond juice, each in equal parts; mix them together, wrap them in a cloth, and apply heat until it is healed.
For the cure of the plague by cautery
When the ulcer appears at the beginning, and you stop up the sight, if the fire cautery is done on the circumference of the ulcer. And all the wise men will tell you that a cauterization should also be made in the middle of the ulcer; but to me this does not seem good, because I fear that it may become inflamed and corrupted, and I have never wanted to do so; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, at the circumference, as we said for many fire cauterizations.
of the swelling that cannot die
For some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the excess fluid it produces, or because of the age of the patient when it is very old, and it has little blood, or because of the heat of the disease; and you see him hurry to die: then cauterize him all around with small fire cauterizations while poking; then let it be like that. Because it will hurry to die.
And if you pierce it all the way with the fire cauterization, make the fire cauterization very hot so that this is its shape:
And hold your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has completely healed, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distance from it in some way so that the course of the pus is chosen. After the cure, as long as he is perfectly healthy.
the fire cure by iron
Another way of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a mixture of members, because it eats the members as fire dries them up. If you see this disease in its beginning, which can be treated with fire cauterization, then heat the cauterizations small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after the fire cauterization on all sides until you have healed all corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that all corruption is not taken away. And then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption. After the cure with medicines that generate heat, in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said about the cure with medicines that generate heat in the division: take it when you need it.
the porcellains that come from the feet
Mouth times has come that the pies by default do not give a disease which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a gross faulted thing that bleeds the foot. And the treatments of this disease are according to 2 ways. It is known cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is so that you heat up 1 cauldron as well like what is a pen of vault, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can push the nail from all sides, and there are subtle margins; after it put everything hot on the nail, and return your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it in this way 1 day as long as it begins to go corruption; then he does a plaster of wild thistle crushed with string, and leaves the plaster on all night, and the nails will chomp and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the sore by charging as much as it is healthy.
And if it is converted by default the body, and many times has come and in hands and em pies, then you must put cautery of hot water; and it is a third way: take a stick of copper or iron, or a pen of vault, and put on the nail and the athenol, that is to say porrells warts; and put the stick on so that it turns red all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the stick comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water route deep until the root; and allow the disease a little the sting of the hot water an hour; then leave it, and it will be uprooted all its roots. So do one after another, as long as you have cured all these that are in the body, then cure the sores that cause char.
And cure the trembling.
Here is the translation of the text:
for the pus-filled blisters
For when the body is covered with pustules that appear from large corrupted matter. If it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a delicate cautery made from fern, whose tip is held in fire, or from the root of a plant called aristeola, or with a lens-shaped cautery. And never make the cauterisation at the beginning when they appear, according to this method; and it cannot grow any more pus, but is healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
For when an artery is cut Maitres avient grant decorremens de sang de l'artere qui est coupe a la plaie que vient au parchemin, ou a l'incision de l'apotheme, ou au cautere du membre, et a les semblanches choses; et est mout grief chose d'estenchir.
Many times there is a great discharge of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the parchment, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop. And yet when any one of them happens, if you hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it a little so that the blood does not gush out any more; then put fire to the olive cauterys, great and small, as long as they are all red; then take 2 ounces, or more or less according to the wound and its place, considering that the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the blood stops.
And if he catches fire when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished; then take quickly another cautery that is on fire.
And do not stop making one after another as long as the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be stopped well unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained carefully.
Who shall administer such a tight bandage of cloth or burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he takes advantage of this?
And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirred nor presented medicine, then he must put his two fingers upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and the vein; and do not move them but moisten them with cold water repeatedly until the blood is frozen and thickened and stretched; and make incisions in advance where cauterization and medicine are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the forms of cauterization are appropriate; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on from there in this chapter by the same route as before for those who wish to test it more lightly than those who seek a cure.
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that with this ointment there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolishness into account. For in many cases people come for treatment. If they come from those who, because of their illness, have died easily due to the violence with which they have endured their illness and the greatness of their ill fortune; and from these one must fear. And of those who give you their advice and say: "Wait, I am dying"; and the illness is treacherous. It is not appropriate that you consent to such people who come to you who have this way; but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open your doors foolishly but carefully, for those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have gained something, and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be converted. And such a one will aid you in acquiring good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Three holy sons, our lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you would like to breathe life into the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to the one before and after the chapter of the cauterizes, which I have devised from the beginning up to the middle, so that you may find more easily that which you will need.
the head full of water
I know that this disease often comes to children in infancy, and when the baby cries too much, it pulls the head of the child; and there is never a response to this reason that one does not understand.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; therefore it seems to me that I should slow down the work of this chapter a little in the cures.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet with water, and each day the head became heavier so that it could not be supported; and because of the moisture, he died, and this moisture came together between the shoulder blade and the rib cage, between the breastbone and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture comes together between the breastbone and the bone, and the ribs are small, then you should cut a wide hole in the head with the edge of the chisel; and be so far away as 12 inches, until the moisture runs; and see this form of the chisel:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross with this form:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, and the signs that you see are that the joints of the head are opened from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand on the inside, and it does not respond to you: then you should cut three cuts in the shape:
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After drawing out the bandages and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then take it off, treating the wound with tar and ointments, and let the head be drawn out equally, and feed the patient dried meat of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the anus, and the gathering of the urine; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
So then cut at the opening of the anus, and the discharge of urine, and deal with it according to what you can do; and guard against covering the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient dies from a burst vessel and the evacuation of moisture.
of remedy
When there is a disease that is called "cataract" in the eye or the kidney, and the disease is old age, and the medicine does not benefit, then the following remedy is: cauterize with what you cover the .ij. arteries.
Therefore, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries show, then extract the patient's neck from all of it; then look where the pulse beats, and the two sides are after the ears, and they are both reopened; then sign the sides, then cover each with a sponge wet with 2 parts. until the cut comes up to the bone, and that is done by the large side of the head.
And if you see it, squeeze out the sponge from the artery and cover it on top; also cut it like 2 parts with a saw.
And when the pulse is covered, then let it go up continuously without stopping.
Et s'il le poignent à lor naissance, se li estraint les euls qu'il ne se muvent tant qu'il naissent.
De migraine.
When the old migraine comes, and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old sore foreheads and similar things, and is medicine by the methods of medicine cure and all this does him no good, let we draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, if com we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a second hair on his temples, and hears to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight except for some men who are too cold; and if it is re-tightened, then extract its neck from some sheets, then rub the place with no sharp cloth, and raise the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulate where this is the shape:
And then peel the skin lightly until you come to the artery, and twist it up like pinches, and remove it well from the cloths that are soiled by each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the hook, and cover it with that part according to the quantity of .ij. chapters. For if it is not covered, then neither will the blood go through all.
And twist the blood of 30 chapters until 15; and if the artery is large, then you must bind it with 15 loops of a strong double silk thread, which will not be broken in front of the splashing of the wound, and will flow away from blood; then cut off the excess that is between the 15 loops at that same time, and then, if you see fit, so cauterize it with the cautery cutlass until the bone is reached while the hair is still cut; and this is the operation of the hot wound, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
For the fire cautery is a great help for ending moisture; because this is even greater aid against moisture. For when extracting arteries, you should fill the artery's place with fine cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you take them off, treat with dry medicines that cause a char to be born, and with tents, until they are healthy; and if there is no cupping by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and extract it by hand so that the blood is extracted; and if you do not have this present, put your thumb on the place as long as the blood is frozen, and raise the place of cold water as long as the blood stops flowing, and extract it in the way that should be; and the one that is moistened and lighter during the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-trimming on both sides, but let the trimming be well spaced to last longer with heat. For when the instrument is too soft, its heat lasts less. And it should have between the two tools a space of an inch, and then when you have tied up the two ends, and you measure with the sharp edge on both sides until it comes to the bone, and cope the vein in the two ends; and they are separated by the two nails because it is not stiffened by this cautery everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery:
the tears
When the tears of the eyes come out of veins that are on the forehead at the top of the skull, and there is no benefit from medicine that is done, and you see the face of the patient turn gray, and feel a cold movement like shivers; and if oil is held and wet so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall, and the eyebrows burn, and are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to do this cure.
And it was called the 'old cure', and that is what you do to the patient who has hair on his forehead, then make .iij. cuts even with the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be as if .ij. doi all along the forehead up to the nose, and the other .ij. are made .ij. inches apart above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. jawbones, and each wound is three fingers wide;
As for the incision that is to be made from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all the cur that is between the two cleavages up to the bone, and then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spike.
if it is placed in the first cleavage the instrument which is called 'chitellaire', and is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other is smooth, not sharpened, and this is its shape: And set the chisel-cutting towards the horse's back at the cur, and the chisel is smooth towards the bone, and the bottle as far as it comes to the middle cleavage. And scrape all the cur that descends from the head to the incision so that it is continuous until that which opens from the cur, and then do the same in the middle cleavage until the other one; and then remove it equally, and express the blood; then put into each cleavage a tent of fine cotton cloth, and put soaked drapes in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep so that the abscesses don't come; and on the third day unbind him, and impart a great quantity of cold water, and then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until he is well.
And take off the cur
When no venereal catarrh has been contracted by habit, and you see the hairs tenacious and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it falls in pain ague comes to the patient, then know that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure which is there, if this is so, is this.
And you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another wide incision; commence from the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the muscles that move when he drinks; and when the bone is exposed, if you suck all the blood out with a sponge, then bind it between the .ij. lips of the cut and put on some cotton wool and linen; then spread some wet drapelz over it (wraps), soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to touch an abscess; when it is exposed, if you rub the bone until it starts to grow, then cure with things that dry up, which cause char.
In this manner: take .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment thereof; and administer it into these wounds to cause char all over.
of the stooping of the ears
All who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or small stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as peas and beans; or flowing thing such as water and easily flowing and similar things.
When it chings in the ear, whether a stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear and does not enter it, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then pour a little violet oil or oil of sesame, then do an extraction; and what is done is to shake with heat, and stop the nostrils when the shaking comes, and put strips of cloth or wool around the ear; and raise the ear above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, then extract it with a fine tweezers, from which this form comes:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then extract it with a small double-ended needle; and if it does not come out with the needle, then make a thread of air and hold the head of the ear with it or a piercing instrument strongly, and stop what is inside the ear with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the thread; then try again, for many times this cure works; and if it does not work in any way, then take glut of milk, such as is used to make cheese, and put some cotton in it; then press the glut on the stone or whatever it is, and try again. If it does not come out with the methods described above, then split the ear in half as if splitting an apple, and spasms; and the way to split the ear so that you make a small cut at the base of the ear, following the shape of the ear, and then put the cut part between your hands and raise the ear above, and make a small cut in the root of the ear on the fat or liquid depending; and let the cut be as thin as a moon, until you find the stone, then hold it with your strength, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy. And if it is seed corn that is infected and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then administer. i.e. a sputum of thin milk according to this form:
and administer an incision on that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them carefully and finely with a pin and with a scissor, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
So that the patient uses sneezing of first condisi, and ample the ear with old cotton. And it is gisans on that ear or the aigre is. if it is, it is good. If not, take many small pieces according to the length of your finger toward and light, and heat them a little at the fire; and put one or another piece in his ear, and chop from another part, and make an incision on another piece on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop making this piece after piece until the aigre comes out all, and so it goes; and if you see it, take 1.i. junon, and bottle one of the chiefs in the ear, and the other chief take from the fire until the most dou jonc is burned; then make another again with others junons until the aigre comes out all, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a bug or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a big one that can be felt, then administer extraction by pinceures; and this is the lightest thing to be found in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if you cannot cure them as we have said in the chapter on division and treatment of distillations, and if the cure is not effective, then look at the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not come out, hold the ear by its shape:
And let it be tight below and wide above. And pour in the subtlest oil into the ear according to the quantity of the pain of the patient, then suck out the form completely; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, split them between cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treatment of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see:
And let it be of silver or gold tight in a small hole, and above to distill; and for pressing inward the distillation with an instrument of bronze well made so that if you see a razor, and you put cotton around the tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cain (cane), and the cain is in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand carefully so that the oil is distilled or the scent comes out of the ear; and smell the patient's medicine inside, and let the distillation be heated on the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the support of ears
No child is born who has no hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by an injury from a splint [a piece of wood or metal used to support or hold something] inside the ear, or a cart falls into the ear, and this splint comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it; and there is no harm done to one, and they can see well.
So that which comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this you should put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has done all this skin-care with which this is formed:
And be careful and cut off in front and behind all plain, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the operation is a splint or a bar of the ear, if you hold it with subtle scratches, and break it lightly, until this splint is all broken.
And if the swelling is entirely in the ear, take a fine sharp razor and warm it slightly, then put it at the root of the ear. If you feel the swelling which the patient feels as grit in his ears, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a small tent according to its width from the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do not make any tent until the wound is healed, or take a small tent and soak it in rosewater, and powder it with vitriolic brooch; and if you see fluid running out of the ear, cover it so that you remove the tent and moisten another tent made of rosewater and wax, until the swelling comes out; then cure it until it is healthy.
And if the discharge of blood comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that heal the discharge of blood which are or to treat with distillations.
of the hair of the papers
Take the hairs that come in sheets when they are moist and dry, so that you stretch them with tweezers and the comb of a spitail from their roots; then put on top of the place vitriolic broid.
And if they are not peeled off, then the fire cautery with the thin lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery afterwards after cutting out comes to rest; and many times they come back, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
from the grease
Many times come in sheets things that seem grease in form and hardness, and for this it is called "grandine", and is a gathering of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; make the cut wide, then the scorch of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the split is large, so cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the oilmens will soon restore it and cause pain.
And if the hair is falling out at the base towards the upper part of the ear, then flip the paper over and are the hairs to two pincers, and the cope and press on both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does no harm; and when the hair has been cut, let the oil of salt water be poured on, and cure the hole of that which causes so much pain until the patient is well.
of the fat from the hairs
is produced when the paper is wrinkled above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears come out; and because they lie on their faces from then on, and sleep like that, and their cheeks are wet with the exinach which opens in the oil. And when you press the leech between your fingers, you feel the exirnach coming out between them.
And the way to use it is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen sheet, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach contained in each part, and then put it on top of him; and press with your fingers from both sides so that the exirnach is assembled in the middle; and cut into the moisture with a sharp blade, making a slit of the right size for the wound made in the vein; and then close up the skin perfectly until you have brought out all the exirnach; and in several dispositions the exirnach comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of fat.
Take then from all a piece of linen between your two palms at the end, and bring back your hand to the left and to the right until it is spread; and be careful not to jerk in the tear, lest you come to all the spittle up to the oil, lest you spill it.
And if the head does not come out in the compression of the tear, then bring it lightly by half a finger so that it appears; then take it as we have said, then moisten the cloth with water and place it on its place, and strain from the bandages.
And if such men grind silk and put on it that moisture which is delayed. Then the doctor cures until he is well. And if he comes to the base of the appendix, the doctor applies poultices soothingly until he is well.
of hairs of paper
When in paper there grow hairs not as nature willed, and become wilted, if they harm the hairs, and bring about manner of diseases such as tears and softens the papers and albugin, until it is a cause of the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or cautery chapître, and is made or by incision and stitching or by caines, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your sound hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, if you pour a needle on all .i. thread above; and let this be done of the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and bring .i. thread above all the spatumile copant, from the great tear until the little one; then take away the thread, and put the paper back with a small cotton and drape, and sign on the paper an image of an ear, as if it were the skin of a mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if there is a need that who has work do great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then do on all spatumile above the 2 lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear until the little one; and let it be an edge near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar in one of the 2 angles of the cure, then scorch it all; then assemble the 2 lips to a stitch of a needle on all thread of fine wool, and rinse the blood, and blow the excess of the threads on the 2 sorcils at all sticky things, if you see to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until 3 or 4 days; then treat the wound without stitcher with dry and constricting things, for the paper relives at the heat of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is moist  (as the old say), and this is work without fear.
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure who is also as the fowl of myrtle, so as we have told, there are .iij. times of eversion according to the form which is here:
then take who surmounts at little forces evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you have no power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take an awl or it has .i. thread, and bottle the figure up; and bottle another thread of leach's blood, and the second thread of little blood, and join them together evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the hide on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 jaws of the wound with sutures, and ease it with cerots and similar abatement;
and any time that the hairs of the paper are converted: it is necessary that you use what we have said of the incision; but the suture in one and another place is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
If it delays, if the binding becomes tight, then cure it until it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the 2 dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And if it is chased away, treat it and let the hairs grow with it, so you will chase the hair away to all the thread that you have ordered it, as long as the hair comes out from above it and you see it by the sight of the oil; then, if you chase the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed 1j. or 1ij., until the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows up; and if the hairs are small, so accompany 1. long hair from natural horses, and let them go with that one or you leave them, as they grow longer and then lighten them.
of the oil
When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the porrittion comes in oil, there are 1j. ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treating this in the text is that you should split those bonds, and separate the lips of him, and put linen inside, and leave it until it heals; and you should not use anything in the cure of him that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but if you use softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or ale or linseed seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted in any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure him from that.
And the treasures of your cure that you take care not to change according to the form that it was before; and the works that we have said are only valid if they are applied from this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
The horse that comes in oil
This text appears to be a description of the symptoms and potential causes of a disease, with advice on how to treat it. The term "axacrati" is mentioned, which may refer to a specific medical condition or treatment method. The "char" mentioned could be a type of medicine or treatment, with the "aguille" and "spatumile" playing a role in its application. Unfortunately, without more context, it's difficult to provide a more detailed interpretation.
And if the figure of the paper comes according to this what is appropriate, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and cut 2 cuts or costs within the paper; and let the 2 cuts of the 2 angles of the incision that you have copied, and let be made one angle so that when they are assembled, that the figure is like the figure of a letter who has not "griesche"; then put this char, according to the quantity that its edges are appropriate to cut, from what puts the paper, then add the 2 parts severed, and the cost of a thread of wool; then cure of what we have said of the mollifying medicines, and of the tent, as long as it is well.
Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, ils leur sont arrachés les yeux pour qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
de la papier
Here is the translation of the provided text:
of the nail of the oil
I understand that the nail has two types: it is either nervous and resembles a hard piece of sinew, or not nervous but resembles a white piece of frozen moisture; when touched with iron and rubbed with pinches, neither can stand it; and both appearances begin to grow steadily until they completely cloud the sight, darkness and light, and movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then he opens the nails; and you hold paper in your hand, then coil the nail with small double-edges, and place it above; then take a needle, and put thereon 1 .1 piece of horse, or cow, or buffalo hair, and 1 strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and peel off at all the nail's root the thin skin that comes with the tears, leaving behind only the tears' natural thread; so that in the incision there does not come the course of tears as usual: and never are the nails tied to the thread alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off the thin skin from all the spatumile where it is soft and small tears, and leave behind only the tear's natural thread.
And keep the spatumile from touching the flesh-cloth and breaking it, and the prune from being pierced; and after the incision pour a little seed oil, and of the colier made of alum, and leave it until the other day; then he cures of what it is necessary as long as it is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncinous can not enter, many times this appearance of nails is cured with medicines; and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see them covered, then do the oil of the disease, and take the sputum lightly according to this form:
And lift up the nail gently, and if you see that it thins out a little and the rawness increases, then distill from your mouth in oil made of chalk and red ochre and seer the oil until the other day; then begin again with another work according to this same way, until it is all healed.
If nothing is opposed to the oil, then like an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess like before until it is healthy, then begin the work again as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eye hurts in the oil by great damage, then suspend it with the uncinous, and pour out a part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into red oil which is made of chalk.
of the horse that was born on the eye
of the horse that was born with a red mane, and covers the eye and is restrained on the papers and turns it to the wind, and seems like a rose of a baluster; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he works the hairs, and twists all of it with suitable hooks on this, and holds it firmly; then take the first mane, and go all the way to the razor until the end, and be careful not to cut the oil on the work; and the incision of the spur that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one oste the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the mane is removed, then put in the oil of seaweed or you distil it with a red color and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put on the oil to the wind with an abin of urine, so that it is assured of an apothesis; and if it does not wait for anything, and the horse rises on him, and you doubt an apothesis, then leave the oil and cure the apothecary from things that calm an apothesis; then go back to your work as long as it is healthy, and in this way do the manes are attached in the oil by this similarity.
But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil according to natural way; and of accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the limbs are suffering from this work.
the hairs of the eyes
the hair of the eye
And let there be two hair in one grade according to this form:
then curl gently the hair in one grade, and wash the blood hour after another, until you see the hair remove from the oil; and keep the oil from the tips of the spatumiles, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only curl the hard ones; and when you have done this, if it is still stuck, distil into the oil green and red wine to corrupt what is stuck.
And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, so make a paste on oil of things that calm the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of the apotheosis warm, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the oil
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, so make a paste on oil of things that calm the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of the apotheosis warm, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
And put on the top of the bone's腐敗 then turn it between your two hands and press your hand a little as long as you can tell that this corruption has stopped; and don't do this once again, then restore the place of dry medicines.
If the bone is stuck together and the neck of the bow is also stuck, and it remains so for a long time, and does not break open again, and there is no bad smell, knowing that it is well; if this is not the case, then there is another device than to bring the fistula to the perforation of the nose according to this form: and that is that you uncover the bone the second time by means of fire, and of sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered thus, take 2.i. forethought according to this form, and let the iron be at 2.iij. angles, and let the knot be thinned up to the top as you see here:
Then put on the bone with delicacy the oil, and keep your hand from the oil a little, then turn it all around until it perforates the bone, and feel the patient through this so that his hand remains on his nose; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the neck is made and hardened the leus, then carry the matter to the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the oil
When the hairs are fully grown, then let him be treated with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
When the hairs are fully grown, then treat him with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
When the hairs are fully grown, then treat him with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
And if the hairs are long and even, let him pierce them with a thin needle that comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture of the albugineous and shave the hairs, and go in between; then remove it until he is well.
from the bow of the oil
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing other than the bow that is assembled in oil, resembling astringent descending liquid, and is not acidic; and the manner of appearance of this chapter is such that you sit the patient on his seat and upright, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and let the bow come up to your hairs; then put it on firmly, and do not descend or move it; and see if the light comes out, and know that it is acidic, and that the descent of the bow is done as we have said. If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin needle and pierce it into the cornee layer .i. hole by the continuation of the connective with the cornee layer and the crown, until the bow comes out; and when it is issued, if it is distended in hot oil mixed with honey or acidic water or fenugreek is boiled and honey added, then cure it from another cure until it is well.
from the oil
Here is the translation of the text:
"Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil esto
"Then take the instrument called «almagda» lightly in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, or your left hand if they are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument at the center of the blight, which is located at the base of the oil, and then express a path after another.
And then therefore the conjunctive only, and do not make it too large, but make it subtle, and then pour the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping coming, in that he sleeps on his back in a dark leu; and be free from all movement, and eat light meat, and do not move his head to right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until seven days; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then let him loosen his bonds until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you bind him, for he will go up to hospital quickly.
And then therefore the pustules only, and do not make it too large, but make it subtle, and then pour the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping coming, in that he sleeps on his back in a dark leu; and be free from all movement, and eat light meat, and do not move his head to right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until seven days; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then let him loosen his bonds until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you bind him, for he will go up to hospital quickly. Put oil on the pustules before the seventh day, and give them what soothes the pustule; and when they are calm, let the vision see and put an eyelid over his face for any day, and then return to that dark house little by little, and turn around in his cases; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in our country fire almagest is poured out, which sucks up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancient ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them to see them; and let them be of pure brass:
And let the head of this middle substance be of water, and behind it in three angles be of fire.
of the cart over the neck
And there are various kinds of carts with different shapes that arise from the earth; some of them seem to be scorpions at the mouth of a well; and if there is one such or another, let you set the patient between your hands towards the sun; then open his nostrils, and pour into those chars the clear liquid, and mix it with water; then take what you have poured on, supporting it in your hands against the sun, until you know that this cart is all solid.
And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if it is opened to all.i. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and without you rising up, or an abscess opening, so dry as it should; and if these are malign abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the sun is set and all the pus is drained, then pour or pour easily and strongly or wine.
And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if it is opened to all.i. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and without you rising up, or an abscess opening, so dry as it should; and if these are malign abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the sun is set and all the pus is drained, then pour or pour easily and strongly or wine.
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a tube, and conduct it too; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be plain for cleaning the head; and have 1/10 always at the head to hold it while oil is heated or any liquid.
of the shoulder on the neck
Miltimes the neck has a disease called "telul", and grows large and becomes very painful to look at; so you must cut it open at the beginning, and burn the bone, then put fire on it; if you delay doing this when it is large, it may get hard, be yellow in color, and not have any feeling: but do not touch it with iron because that is an abscess; for if you cut into it even once, great evil will come to the patient. The abscess should be touched very lightly, not by a yellow color, and you can see that it can all be covered, so the patient is empty and does not feel pain, and cure him with dry and restraining things.
when the neck is cut and cured
When the neck is cut and cured
The manner of the suture is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
abscesses of the lips
A home, within the lips, appears a hard, grainy-like pustule, small and large; therefore, you should turn the lips, split each one at the tip, and catch it with pincers, and then apply the vitriolic paste to the area until the pus is drained; and then wash it off with water, and treat the area with dry things until they are healed.
the color of the gums
Maitre de l'art de la chirurgie, il est bon d'apprendre que les dents qui ont été arrachées doivent être maintenues avec des tenailles, et la racine doit être coupée, et laisser couler le sang; puis mettre sur le trou du vitriole ou d'autres poudres qui retiennent l'humidité et séchent; et si celui-ci revient après l'incision, et arrive souvent, si la racine est coupée une deuxième fois, et cautérisée: s'il ne revient pas après la cautérisation; et voilà les formes des instruments pour combler.
Orde de la chirurgie
Orde de la chirurgie:
Orde de la chirurgie: Here is the translation of the text:
After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out, then take any of these tools and put it inside from all sides slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the gap is wide and deep, then fill it with gauze, and place the tweezers lightly on either side; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And you must do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the malice of the root with greater pains than the first. And you must guard that you do not do so as does the ignorant patient who, because of his haste and pride, often breaks none but the carriage, and never attains to what we have told; but brings about none but great illness for the roots that he delays, or for the carriage that he breaks, as we have often intended; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the hole with wine or ale and salt; and they run away from it without stopping, so often comes a pain, if you employ the hole of vitriol broiled; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
The forms of instruments, so that the teeth do not break first, are long-tipped and thick-handled, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be of strong members so that they do not bend when you pull, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold the molars in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root stays in place when pulled, if you put cotton and oil on the joint as well as it is softened, then the pliers which are called "algefri" seem to be a grindstone; and let them be made inside as a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you uncover the whole frame around the root, and put the instrument which is called "Althali", that is to say palanquin, so that this is the form:
And be careful and strong so that it does not break, and the root goes out through this, that is good; if not, you help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps himself with this instrument which has .ij. rays, of which this is the form:
and other tools that are in front in the reason of the nails, and of this instrument which seems a great nail, whose form is:
Et soit ciste instrument est rum qu'il ne puisse briser, et saices que mot d'instruments de dene sont; et ausi d'autres instruments, qui ne sont mie compte; et li sais maîtres subtils trueve par soi mesme son instrument, selonc ceu que ses œuvres et li maladie li demoustre, car il y a de tains maladies ou li ancien n'enseignerent point d'instrument pour la diversiteit des au s et s'om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as instruments qu'il i convenit, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme: And be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and remove; and then return him to the place of medicines convening to this, and if there is any corruption in the bone, and it is small, if the reamow has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then take this instrument which has this form, and is like a small beak, and is of iron made:
And the chaperone is small and small by the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that we can scrape it, let us scrape it with a piece like this:
And it is also like the lime with which we make needles; and when you scrape the tooth little by little lightly, so that it does not move until it has been cut; then, at the end, all of it must be shaved with a razor, and its surface too hard and it bleeds the tongue, therefore, it is necessary to scrape the roughness as much as possible so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor damage speech.
When the tooth moves
When the tooth moves, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press upon what he chews because it makes him sneeze; and you have cured them with restricting medicines, and that does not work; then, you should restrain it with a gold thread, because silver thread turns green and spoils, but gold never does; and make the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any toothache, pick up the thread and double it between the two teeth, then place the caps between the teeth, if there are more than one, until you have reached the sound tooth on the other side; then, restart the wrapping gently and carefully, until it does not move; and if it dessticks, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another thread; if it dessticks and stays in place, leave it tight, and let it stay as long as possible, and if it comes loose, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another thread; if it stays in place for a long time, and works well, and that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the wrapping of the sound teeth and the caps of the two teeth, if you see:
And when the tooth is loose, if you set it in its place, time after time, as we have said; and do not meddle with it who are not skilled and chịu; and never make the shape of a tooth of an ox's bone, and set it in its place where it has failed, and hold it fast as we have said, and delay and endure for so long.
To remove the copper from the tongue
No one should take copper from the tongue or nature it out, except in an accident of sore throat; and the procedures are such that you open the mouth of the sick person and put your hand under his chin, and draw the tongue; then cut off the copper from the back with a large knife, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no pain, and it is the result of an accident of sore throat, then cut it off with a sharp edge, and guard that the incision is not too perfect, lest the artery be cut; and when you have done so, take away pure rose water and cold water, then put a bandage of linen on the tongue; and dye it every night, so that the root cannot come up. And if the sore comes back, then cauterize with a lenteen cauldron, which is good for this; then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
And if you see red or black or hard color on it or not feel it, for this is a cancer; and if it inclines to blenchor and has moisture, then pour the copper in and make an incision with a fine scalpel, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the sick person comes to you, put it on vitriolic broth until it is well, then return to your procedure as much as you want; then take away the water of aise and seil, and cure it with other remedies until it is well.
of the throat abscesses
of the throat abscesses come from within the throat which are called "godath", and they are named properly as 1.ij. amandres, and when you cure them, if, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is an abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch with iron for the pain of blood; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it up, but first see if the abscess is hot and has calmed down. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his neck be straight, and he opens his mouth and puts his elbows between his hands, and presses the tongue onto all the instrument, from which this form is made; and be of silver or fine gold as our knives:
Then you press the tongue onto all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scalpel and put it in the amande, and raise it up higher than you can; and do not touch any threads with it, then cover the instrument, from which this form seems to be a sharp thing; and nevertheless the head is corbe, and one side over the other, and are very acute, and is made of iron or any other metal:
And if you do not have this instrument, if you cover it with pliers, from which this form seems to be a sharp thing; and nevertheless the head is corbe, and one side over the other, and are very acute, and is made of iron or any other metal:
And be careful on both sides, and when you have cut one of the apples, if you cut the other according to that same way, and after the incision gargare with the patient hot water, and hot and easily, and move away from sanc coming, if gargarism with the patient's astringent, or scoops of pomegranate be cooked, or leaves of myrrh, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat him as long as he is healthy; and never come in the throat other abscesses than the .ij. apples, if they are cut just like the .ij. apples.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess; and I had it very well closed all the way up, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1 day or 2. And this abscess was so high that he had been 2 or 3 rains by the 2 or 3 openings where it was coming out. So I waited a while, and put in one of the onions, then pulled it hard, and cut off a large portion of bow; then put another in the other opening from which it was coming out, and pressed her mouth shut and her tongue; then I put the onion into these abscesses, and put some in, and there came out only a little bit of blood; and so the passage in her throat opened up for the woman, and she began to drink water and wine again, and did not stop cutting off this abscess for a long time; and the abscess went back, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it got very big; then I took hold of it and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God did after me.
about the grape vine
When the pain comes to the eye, and it is gone and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very big and round, it is called "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the aposteme is calm, and thin, then you should cut it; and that which is round assembled and not far away; and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger with this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, that its blenchor and its longesce, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument we have mentioned above; then put the oncine into the eye, and turn it around, and cover it with .i.i instruments that I said in incising .i.i mandrels. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you do, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i.i mandrels, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient fears to be covered, then you should use an instrument for cauterization when the pain is painful. The way of cauterization is sharp. And it is that the patient put his head on your well, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument we have mentioned, where there is a sharp edge, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which this form comes:
And put your hand on his head where the hair grows, so that he can let the medicine touch his eye, as if with a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and may the patient lie on his side, so that he salivates and his mouth water comes out of the medicine into his throat, so that it does not go down to his chest and burn him; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye for an hour's half, until you see it heal and the medicine has calmed its stings; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton around the eye, until the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash it after 3 or 5 days. And if you need to clean the medicine out of the eye, if it has been put in, and after the cauterization rinse it with very cold water, and cure it with gargles until it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than the incision or cauterization; if it has been cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and yarrow and oregano and thyme and chamomile and hawthorn and other herbs, and put them all together or any of them in a 1-liter pot, and pour water into it easily, and bring it to a boil; and the pot should be very tightly covered with a strong lid, and set the pot on 1 instrument prepared in this way: Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l'uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; après lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faiches ceu au comencement de l'avenement de l'aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que à la declination d'aposteme chaut. Et si cist estrument n'est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craffe d'uef, si que li bouche au malaide n'ait mie trop chaut; car li craffe d'uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c'est bone cure ensamble salut.
Muitas vezes se arde na garganta osso ou espinha de peixe, ou nenhuma coisa; então é conveniente que você tire o que você pode ver e pressione a língua ao sol com todo o instrumento, para que você possa ver o movimento da coisa; e o que não se abre para você e está encoberto na garganta, é conveniente que você faça vomitar o doente assim como a carne é cozida no estômago; talvez, se isso não funcionar, o doente engolirá um pedaço de esponja, ou uma peça de nável, ou uma raiz de alface, ou 1/4 de pão seco; e prenda a esponja com um fio e depois a transglutir; e quando ela chegar ao fundo, se abrirá, então puxe forte; e se ela não vier forte de tudo o que dissemos, pegue 1/4 de instrumento de mergulho de acordo com esta forma:
E seja o instrumento curvado na testa se ele puder entrar com mais facilidade na garganta e levantar a cabeça para cima; e tenha cuidado para não tocar a epiglote, de modo que ela não caia; e mova vale que o doente boğa o instrumento, para que ele faça vômito ou seja encoberto; se ele engolir, ou ele vomitar todo o instrumento uniformemente, até que ele saia.
of the blood from the throat
No time is medicine for the blood, if as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not profit, then look at the throat of the patient under the sun, so that you press it with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, take a fine hook, or tiny tweezers that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, then take a piece of hair from a horse, and pour it into the throat of the patient, then pour the hair  .i. hot, and do this often. And if the patient is dark all day, then take a full pint of cold water, and open the mouth, and drink it down, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, then spit.
And if it does not spit as we have said, then submerge the patient in ash water, at the instrument that I have told you in the smoke of the oven; do this often, for it will not gag. And the way of the smoke is that you press a pot or it has viscous charcoal, and let the cover be torn so that it falls into the middle, and on that hole is the head of the instrument; then pour your smoke, and the patient put the end of the pipe in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the blood; and the blood will now come out, and if it does not come out, then begin the smoke again by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty things and bitter, and do not drink water; and then the proper work is that she goes away by this government.
And the form of the instrument to see if one can tell, is, when one can see it, similar to hooks twisted for entering into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's pick, and has sharpness of lime, so that whoever takes it cannot leave it; and see this form:
the ointment for abscesses
The head of an abscess has two forms, one that is moist and the other that is dry. The moist one comes from the middle of the head, and the dry one comes from the jaw. And each has its own nature in work.
If an abscess does not need to be pierced, then let it dry out as long as the swelling lasts; and if one is crut, then pierce it when the swelling has subsided, so that it will not hurt the main member. For if an abscess comes from a joint, and you leave it until it is rotten inside, perhaps the ligature and nerve of the joint will be damaged, and this causes contraction in that limb. But if an abscess comes from the principal member, then let it heal; and if one is crut, then pierce it before it has healed completely, so that the one that comes from the foundation does not rot to the end, and become a fistula, and cannot be cured well.
It is necessary that you know the time for piercing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the stirring up of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where there is most thickening of the skin, and where it opens most easily; and let the perforation be made with a long knife, and if it is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves, and in all the limbs evenly, where there is no pus.
In those that are swollen, according to the limb. And when abscesses are in the flesh, so as they must burst, you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you draw along the course of his blood, and it is full of filth; and perhaps harden the lips and deepens him. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the largeness of the limb, according to what the members require. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover them up, and to plug; when they have been made as 2. i. drapels, and are softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with buboes: and if there are such that are split in 3. angles, and if there are such whose lips are also split like the skin of mirth, as abscesses of the angles; and if there are such that are made into a round size, and other sizes and a similar appearance of being cut.
In those that are swollen, according to the limb. And when abscesses are in the flesh, so as they must burst, you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you draw along the course of his blood, and it is full of filth; and perhaps harden the lips and deepens him. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the largeness of the limb, according to what the members require. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover them up, and to plug; when they have been made as 2. i. drapels, and are softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with buboes: and if there are such that are split in 3. angles, and if there are such whose lips are also split like the skin of mirth, as abscesses of the angles; and if there are such that are made into a round size, and other sizes and a similar appearance of being cut.
And if the discharge from the wound comes out, you put cold water and quickly, and wet 2. i. drapels, and place them over the wound many times. And if the discharge persists, you put government and medicine, and the powders that I have said in your hands in this book, and if it is or not dry, and the leavings of the wound are very nervous, it is necessary that you put on tents and drapels wet in wine and oil warm; and if it is dry, and the leavings are meaty, you put on drapels wet in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; and then take off the abscess and clean it and cure it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
And it is necessary to know this everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the ointment.
of sores
Here is the translation of the first paragraph:
Here is the translation of the second paragraph:
of the scrofula
Many times there is an abscess at the throat, and they open the arteries and veins, and they come from one place to another, and they are swollen and inflamed; and each scrofula is properly within its rib, as the nut and the abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health. Now, therefore, when you see one that is of a good disposition in the breast, and has a color like that of the flesh, and is silent on both sides, and is not deep; it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape each part, and there are  .ij. lips of the heart to be tied with one thread, if you need it, as we have said in the neck abscesses; and trim little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor let the blade slip, lest you do harm, and look too far ahead, lest you cut more than you should.
If you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, then put vitriolic acid on it, or some powders that restrain blood, and squeeze the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula has hardened at its root, if there are no small scrophulas, cut them and clean them. And if there is a big scrofula at the root of the neck, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula in its root, but bind it with a double strong thread, and let it hang by it, without causing any harm; then employ cotton dipped in unguent to dress the wound.
If you cut the whole scrofula, you must assemble the .ij. lips of the wound and sew them now, without causing any delay for the size of the scrofula; it is necessary that you bind its root, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrophulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce in this way, following the order of the one before, then introduce tentes with unguent and similar things, so that it corrupts whoever is delayed by corruption; and when the wound has been well cleaned, if it is healthy, then dress it with unguent, covering with a cloth, as long as it remains healthy.
Here is the translation of the text:
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the lancing of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script from their words.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the slicing of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be removed; and no aid should be sought from anyone, for all the veins and the pulse of the patient are in the mouth or the throat or.ij. mandres. When the patient is in the canal of the pulse, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the stranglehold from which there is no escape does not come.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we do so with a sharp blade.iiij circles or a small slit through which the quantity of the cut does not reach the cartilage;
and if they are suitable for cutting the epiglottis that there is no chip, and the vase is long of it;
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cuts the cartilage as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid cutting the windpipe, unless you see something, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, join the .ii. lips of the wound together, and the whole skin below the cartilage; then administer medicines that make blood flow, until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one must not do this as long as the throat is entirely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of it brings him back to life. And then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot die, and he breathes through the wound, and in this way he is preserved from death;
and so the elder instructs that the wound be kept open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iij days or iiij And then they commanded that the wound be sewn and healed, until it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw; I saw that a young lady took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went out through the monestary door;
and I was called by the healer, and I found it just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that it had discharged; I saw that it had not broken a vein but had come from deeper inside the body, and the blood had flowed out through the wound.
I hurried to bandage the wound, healing it until it was cured;
and the damsel only became red-faced, and afterwards she returned to her usual self;
for I do not know if there is fear in the surgery of the epiglottis.
of the large throat
is called "gorge hernia", and is a great hernia in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
and it is according to .ij. manners: natural, and accidental; or natural has no gadgetry.
And the accident happens according to .ij. manners, one is resembling grass on us, and another manner is resembling an abscess coming from us of arteries; and there is doubt, and it does not come to operate fire furiously that in the one who is small, and prove and search all the intruder: if you prove it as well as grass our, and can not at all, if the cup, if it cups us, and tries to all his beard, if there is any; and search well altogether, and treat if necessary, so that it is completely healthy.
of the fire cautery
There are many ways to perform this treatment, all of which I will describe.
and so it is necessary that I make the full distinction between our methods and those of others.
I say that the treatment is hot and fiery, until the fever and chills have passed, and then the purifying is complete; afterwards, the fever and chills subside.
With this nut there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains 1 [unit of measurement] syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the skin, and begins also like a kernel, and becomes thick.
and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and all of their colors are as I said in the division.
When you come to the cure of the nut, you should try and ask first about the instrument that is called "entremissoire", according to its form or the paste that follows.
And the way of the investigation of abscesses is that you squeeze or more moistly place your fingers in the abscess, and turn them little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the pus, then do it according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the instrument of insertion, and take care not to break it.
If the moisture runs quickly, that it be colored, so that you do it like I said with other abscesses;
and if after the instrument of insertion no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so you do it in a cross-wise way, and take hold of it with tongs, and scorch it lightly on each side, and leave it at rest where it lies, so that you get it healthy with the not;
and if you cannot get it out healthy, take it apart piece by piece so that nothing remains still;
For if I don't stay, he returns to us many times;
and if it takes a little time, and there is no pain, but employs the wound with some corrosive water, and removes the wound, and puts on things that calm the abscess, and cures other things until it is well;
and if we take a great deal of it, so that the .ij. lips of the wound are cut off, and he cures what causes it to happen;
and if the wound is opposite or other if you hurry and employ the place of vitriole broiet, and leave it ii days or iii, as long as the wound leaks, and returns to copper what has been left;
Here is the translation of the text:
and they are also like the needles used for piercing sorceresses, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and they move easily those that are yellow, and are more proven to pierce black lead in order to encircle the corbales of fistula.
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
The forms of the instruments are of various shapes, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are instruments that have three quarters of three manners as well;
and if one has three combs and are also of three types; and if one has two combs and one comb only, and are of three types; and all of them are necessary in their places.
The chief of these to that one does is sharp, and such ones have I who do not cut well but only from one side, because one scours the skin so as not to hurt the vein or the nerve;
And of these interpositionals are the alambics set in many parts, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three types: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
and don't use more than one pair of shoes that are not worn out, because they are like legs, arms, nipples, elbows, and similar things;
and never make another small instrument that resembles the shape of a scraper, according to this form, so that you do not hurt yourself with it:
and never place it in the place that hurts when rubbing together, and never rub according to this great form:
and never inflate the breasts of certain men when they tighten them, because they look like a woman's breasts:
and they remain lame and swelled up, and who must be cured if it goes according to this form from this line: b. until: . then scrape the fat, and employ the wound with medicine, encasing it, then stitch together the iij lips of the wound, and cure as long as it is healthy;
and let it suck in the milk, and be softened by its size so as to resemble women's breasts, if they are made into iij knots above, by iij similar cleavages; of which the larger line is held to the smaller one at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; Then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and give those that we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure until it is well.
and if it is not well, or the incision is not entirely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton wet in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until the juice and the remaining fat have evaporated, then treat it until it is well.
the heels of the feet
The cysts that come from abscesses are handled like hard scrofula or if they have ribs and contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture are to be cut according to this form, from the line B up to the line G. : And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if you employ cotton wool and leave it there for another day, then remove all the wool, and treat with an ointment appropriate to this until it is healthy again.:
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound is oozing, apply fire cautery as we have described.:
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the flesh above it is tightened, then many abscesses and also the escape of blood come about and an abscess;
and if one knows how to recognize when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long enough to heal completely. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel a twisting sensation; and when it is for the vein, if it feels like it is being pulled apart.
and this is crazy to cut this abscess, and most when it is dislocated at the ankle and at the knee and elsewhere, and it is very large. Therefore the treatment of iron must be avoided, and that which is at the shoulder must also be avoided, and in that which is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin above it longwise;
Therefore the treatment of iron must be avoided, and that which is at the shoulder must also be avoided, and in that which is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin above it longwise; then operate on the waist as one does, and carefully separate the artery from the tissue, until it is uncovered;
then insert an awl, and drive it through just to the other side of the coast, and pull the artery with a double thread of silk, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point out the place which is between the 17th ties of an intramossoire while the sun does not go out who is there, and let it be free the aposteme;
then provide the cure that causes fever, as long as the line trembles; and then treat this with ointment coming from here, as long as it is healthy;
and if the aposteme is by the size of the vein, then you have to have it in your hand what you can get from the aposteme all over the leather, Then put the needle through the hole that you hold in your hand, and let it have .i. a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; Then tie the apothecary, as I have told you, or one of the two ends to the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle on all of the apothecary to the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in three lengths;
Then cut off the surplus of the apothecary, then cut off the surplus of the curl and leave what is tied;
then pour over it with a damp cloth in wine and oil, then bring the cure of tent and ointments as long as it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the nuts
Also, when the abscesses come in the artery and the vein, they come to the nuts when it is wounded, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens in the shoulders and the arms and in all joints, and its color seems like the color of the heart, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not fully healed, but take care of it.
and do not move well on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, and do not cover with iron; perhaps there will be a contraction.
and those who are at the head or in front, make the skin with a spatule. If the aphesis is small, if it has nails, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, if the hangnail has come off with the skin, then burn it, and then cut it, and sew up the wound, and let it heal until it is healthy.
big holes hanging down No time has come to the belly and no other part of the body, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw. I. home who had .ij. or bellies that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were broken open, and they ran together with moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be XVIII ounces in weight, and the other XVII Z. and that their incision was such that if you look at it, the patient is wet, and the color of the artemisia is bleached and moist and has a fine root.
if the cut is with a wide scalpel, and the fire cautery is ready in your presence. For often there are too great irregularities of blood, and he comes to you without delay, so hasten then to cauterize;
and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of flannel, and bind it to the artemisia as we have said, and leave it for II days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the flannel to the artemisia until it copes with it, and test it throughly; and if the roots are large, then have fear at the copeling itself for the belly, but you well coped half of it,
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound and keep you from covering the patch that is of fox color and poor sense and of milky milk.
For this is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the treatment of leprosy hereafter.
when the bad blood
as a bad smell that comes from cauterizing a wound or a fracture of the skull, and it is on the belly and there are some of the bad smells, so as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various exits. and if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it towards its two ends it returns again, and sometimes if it is strained, and enlarges much at the entrance to the bath and due to great work.
and if it is due to moisture, then it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, then open it according to the quantity:
and if it is due to wind, then it is at the top of the thigh, and the work is that you look at its appearance, which is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or wind: If it is necessary that you leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of the chaplet of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels and be extended on his back, then sign all around the bowel. then instructs him to cut softly between your hands, and then signs the entire limb that you have signed with your hand, And make half of the abscess at the top to all the great hook.
Then extend half the abscess onto the thread, and with your index finger, touch the intestine. If you feel it stuck to the thread, and if it comes off, touch the intestine at the end of the abdomen.
and if you find the boil, take it by the root, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery is blocked or torn, and you hear a loud noise, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and tie .ii. strands of thread, and tie the needles around that which you have made to pierce;
then stretch the abscess in .iii. places above the needles, and if you see, cut off the needles, and leave it there until it decays, and then remove it with a knife; or cut it when it is soft and decayed, then treat it as you have said, and chop off the abscess if necessary;
or cut it when it is soft and decayed, then treat it as you have said, and chop off the abscess if necessary; And extract the blood where you see moisture, then heal the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
and for the ulcer
and for the ulcer We have spoken in the division about the appearance of ulcer, and how it should be operated upon with medicines, and how one should cauterize the wound; and we say that an ulcer is incurable when it is in the face or in the genitals, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancient book says that when an ulcer is in a good position to be cut, like an ulcer in the breast or in the loins, or in any other part where it can be easily reached; and when it is large and old, then one should only approach it, for I have never known anyone to cure it, nor has anyone ever cured it before me.
And the incisions, when they are in a good position to be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge any black bile; then make it well if it has manifest repletion, then afain make it well  .i. a good place for the incision; then put on your oncins or ulcer, and shave all around it, and burn all around it without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press firmly with your hand or with anything, and if the bleeding stops, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then heal it with another remedy until it is well.
from dropsy from dropsy Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Then look to see if the idropisia is going into the intestines: it is fitting that you should split it open on both sides of the navel, right at the top of the hand; and if the idropisia is caused by liver disease, then your split should be on the left side of the navel; and if it is caused by bile, then it should be on the right, and it is only fitting that the patient should lie on his back on the split, so that the excess does not run to that weak part.
And pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand up to all the spatumile between the skin and the syringe too, as if you are scraping an inch or so; then pierce the syringe until the spatumile comes out clear, and this is the leach of the water, then make it firm, and pour this instrument out, where it seems like a silver dog, and is made of brass or light iron, and has a hole in the middle. And on one side there is 1 hole, and on the other 2 holes, and on the other 1; and the head is cut so as to look like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that the authors cut the quill with:
At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then pour it out immediately on the instrument; empty half or a third, for if you empty more than this at that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will throw up, or come near death;
but pour out according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its poults mean, then try the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now for the time that it stumbles on the hole that is on the syringe, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this way; then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try a little amount of water:
Do not work any day, and guard yourself from overwork as long as it is not necessary but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him drink water, then cure him with dry medicine while he is still wet, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and blacken him with wine; and cure him with medicinal dried medicine until he is well, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of water as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis No child is born who does not have a foreskin that is small or who does not have it in its place. If it comes to pass that it does not pierce at all .iij., then make a small foreskin of skin according to this form: then tie and keep it bound for iiij. days, or iiji. And when it urines, if it is not tied, let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he will not have any trouble, because the urine that comes strongly does not leave the foreskin closed. The foreskin that is small or that does not have it in its place, if it comes to pass that it does not pierce at all 13, then make a small foreskin of skin according to this form: then tie and keep it bound for 12 days, or 11. And when he urinates, if it is not tied, let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he will not have any trouble, because the urine that comes strongly does not leave the foreskin closed.
And the manner of this work is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are both cut off, as long as a feather; so that the foreskin pierces in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the loss of blood which often comes, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops the blood, and cure the wound until it is well.
of the penis come often come pus in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are both evil and not evil ones; so that you should squeeze them with one hundredth of a drop of egg white, and clean them all over, then put cotton wet with egg-yolk extract on it; then cure it with the extract until it is well. And if the pus is evil in color and foul-smelling, then you should apply fire to it. When you have cut it off, and some of it is inside the hair and some outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it has hardened, then cure it outside. For when you cure it all together, if it is not firmly set in the foreskin, then it will come out black and corrupt in its foreskin and where the cocoon is; so you should burn all of it that is black and corrupt, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour which has been made from the bark of pomegranates and dates, then cure it with other cures until it is well.
And if the pain comes on, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes so help together the 21 arrangements: that is to say, at the beginning of the pain and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or lead into the penis a string of plunk, and urinate among the patient; and when the hair comes off at the top of the penis which was not yet circumcised, or there is an abscess or an absces, then it is necessary that you scrape it with 1 instrument, until the ligatures are removed, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
And if it is a very difficult case to deal with, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatulum on the top of the penis and the skin; then carefully remove between 21 and 25, and put a thin cloth of linen wet in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
of circumcision
is not dislocated by continuing if it is like the other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do it with the best work and the lightest hand for salvation.
I say that the old people did not say anything about circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and the most honorable who did circumcision at Dalar, and in strength, and in all a novelness; so it was because there are 1.2 threads, and by chance if one copes on that above and demore that dislocation.
Or the recovient copes, and is the pain double, and to the washing which is of Dalar is not assured the point of the member; and by chance escapes the nail the iron, and corrects the work, and often are born so that there is no need of washing and I have wanted.
For the washing which is done in strength to all the thread of file I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the strengths cut as well above as below.
Car when you press your hand, so that the fingers are equally shortened; but let the string be well-fixed around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think that you only bind the string around the penis with so much force, and then cause it to suffer in all ways that you can. Then hold the string tightly between your hands straight, and stretch the forces between your hands so that the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and squeeze or rub, and turn it upwards as far as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well with the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double string, then tie another string to it; and hold it between the two strings at the second ligature to the scrotum and little finger, and tighten the ligature between the two strings, then lift the penis up carefully and turn the head of the penis.
Then hold the string tightly between your hands straight, and stretch the forces between your hands so that the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and squeeze or rub, and turn it upwards as far as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well with the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double string, then tie another string to it; and hold it between the two strings at the second ligature to the scrotum and little finger, and tighten the ligature between the two strings, then lift the penis up carefully and turn the head of the penis. Then let it run a little and a little, for it is the wettest; and put powder on top of the powder and over the powder  .i. drapelet is glued with a mixture of baked egg white mixed with rosewater, confited with good oil and fresh herbs, and left alone until the next day, and the cure is cured as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the forces in the cleaning is this: the two fingers are to be spread and cut, and are the same as long as they are evenly shortened.
The error of cleansing if it is when the curets run out at the incision; so that you must extend it to your nail, as if the leans make an abscess; and let it dry evenly; and if you cannot hold it on your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then let it dry.
And if it has passed three days, and what is at the root of the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the pustule has been cleansed, and the skin has been peeled lightly; if you can move it easily, and keep away from the part of the penis, that will not harm him.
Cure then the powder of bitter things over sore places, which we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you cope too much, and it goes up, that will not harm him; cure it then, as we have said, until it is well.
double retention of urine
The retained urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or a bowel obstruction, or chafing from riding in a carriage, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the chapter on urinary retention.
If the urine does not flow, and you see the retention due to a stone at the base or neck of the bladder, then let the patient lie on his back; and let them put pressure on their back, and extend their stomach from above their back, and restrain the patient so that they can lie as much as possible; and then force the base of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine flows.
If this does not work, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use all the instruments that are called 'syringes', which have the following form: and let it be very light silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cannula be a palm long and half, and very fine at the tip.
And the way to express the urine is that you take a double thread of silk, and tie it at the tip with wool or cotton, and pour the tip of the thread into the syringe; and drain off the excess of the wool and pour it into the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and a little cumin, and make the patient sit up, and moisten the bladder and urethra with oil of olive and water.
Then hold up the syringe lightly in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the buttocks; then pour the syringe before the bladder, and let the urine flow into the thing that is empty, and this is not done according to this order but only because the person who leads him or she goes there twisted; then tie the thread all around the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it firmly, and make the urine run.
and start again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and the patient remains calm.
for diseases of the bladder
When blisters or sores come to the bladder, or rust is formed there, and you pour there water and medicines, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is in this form:
She is closed, and if it is .iij. split: .ij. from one side, and .i. from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by which the medicine stops well the beard without addition, if we can draw out the moisture, and throw when necessary is.
and when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the healer in the moisture, and draw while doing so who is behind; if you will draw the moisture at the healer, and then throw back strongly the one who is behind; if it will enter the moistures behind, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema by which the bladder is enema: if it is here:
and it is silver or oak, and is the head above; and desoz to 1.i. side or the ties chiet; then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture which you see to enema the bladder, then lie between the 1.ij. sides form of a good double thread, and heat 1.pocc that the moisture on the fire; then bottle the chief of the enema in the beard, then strain your hand on the bladder all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you have no bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into .i. a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then run .i. a strong thread through these perforations, then join the circle together as one would join .i. a dal, and put in there what you will of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already spoken about the division of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between the stone in the lower parts and all other signs; and how one must work when it comes to the bladder and the womb; and I will tell you openly and briefly about that.
I say that the stone that is in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtleness; and it opens easily, and rubs the patient's womb, and scratches it many times, and then becomes smooth; and it is light to recover the health of the children until they are 24 years old, and heavy for the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to clean the patient with a hot poultice so as to extract all the pus that is in the intestines. For he never seeks the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and move them up to the chest so that the stone comes out of the bladder completely; then do not let it rest on its own; then make it sit between your hands, and remove the clothes from his legs, so that the bladder hangs down towards the ground; then examine and touch it.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut above the stone. And if it doesn't come out with touch, then moisten your right index with oil from your left hand, since the patient is old and mature; then pour it on its base, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, so that the water goes to the neck of the bladder; then press with your two fingers, and pour it out at the end where you felt the cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to stretch with his right hand the anus up above, and with his left hand hold the skin that is beyond the anus in the part where one cuts; then pour the liquid, of which this is the shape:
And make a notch between the pubis and the pelvis, not in the middle but at the cost of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two legs should be close together or against the pelvis, and the size of the traver should be wide from the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
In case the press should fall away from the foundation, so that it does not work; and know that there is a part of stone where it has angles and edges: this is bad for extraction; and if there is a part which is round like a globe, resembling a ball and a circle, whose exit is light.
On the other hand, if there is a part where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not fall, so that you can extract it with pliers which are like a file at the end, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you should use a sharp knife, cutting into it; and if you cannot grasp it like this, then open a small hole, and if it is broken, so that the extraction of vitriol;
And if there is more than one stone, first bottle the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cope it up, then cut it off, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it should be made to come out, and make a larger wound; for 10 things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out suddenly by the way that the leach does not hold; but nevertheless you force him to extract him, or with pliers, as long as you extract him in pieces.
and when you have finished your work, if it pleases you employ the ointment of myrrh and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on .i. a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to soothe the abscess; then unbind the patient from his neck, and do not untie the bond until three days have passed.
And when you untie it, if you raise it up well with oil and water, then treat the wound with dapanicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healthy again.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if this is held back, which goes out in a certain way with urine: then put your finger in the wound, and take out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and burn it.
And then raise the wound with water and sand and mud, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it is necessary that, for every hour that you cure it, you bind the legs together, and put the remedies on top of each other.
And if the stone is small, and it lies in the tube of his urine, and does not come out; then he who I said above, that you cut many times, is excused from cutting because of this cure. I have tried it like this.
Take a piece of iron according to this form and be it in three angles,
Then take a file and place it in the tube of his urine at the base of the stone, so that it does not come out; then push the file lightly into the penis at the base of the stone; and turn the file back to your hand, poking it gently, until you can pierce the stone from another part; then very soon the urine will come out, and he will be cured. If it is suddenly broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this with any tool that hurts it, take a file and place it in the stone at one end, and another on top of it; then pull out the file forcefully, and remove the file thread from its place, and wash the frozen blood that is in the wound; and heal him until he is well.
of the woman's stone
May a stone be found in women, and if it is not found, there is great difficulty: the first is that the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who can go to the physician's house, even though she is married.
And the third way is that one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman' stone is more perfectly formed than the man' stone, so that one must make a deeper cut, and there is great fear with it.
And if necessary, send for a midwife who is well-informed, and if you do not find it, ask no more. If you cannot find a well-informed midwife, order a woman who knows a part of the art to make the stone for you; and order her to make the stone from the inquiry of the stone.
and observe well that his wife is a virgin: then he should put out his thumb or foundation and seek the stone; and if she does not hold it, he will remind her that she puts out her thumb or with the disease, and wants and presses his left hand on the bladder formed.
If she does it, then let her move it slowly from the entrance of the bladder to the root, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh; then put your hand on the stone at the center of the leg, where it is broken, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your thumb above the stone or off it, and cut it small first.
Then cut the root of the leg where you feel the stone, if it comes out easily, then know that there are many types of stones: some are small and some are large and rough and some are long and round, and some have a point. If you know their appearances, then know the outcome.
And if it does not come out, then put it in vinegar, and hold it for an hour until the stone is removed; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have tools that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if it does not come out, and this is the artery that is torn, then sprinkle the powder on top and squeeze out blood and pus, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, because by chance the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has abated, and the place is open again, if it returns to your work, until the stone is far away.
of hernias that cause pain
is made from water or white milk that is mixed with the seeds of fennel, which contains the essence of the onion; and is called "syfac", and never properly in the tapestry of the onion itself, if one believes that it is another type of onion; and this milk of the fennel between the white milk we have spoken of; and this one does not come out.
And the procreation of this ramose thing is so of weakness that comes to coions, and is spread out that matter.
And so often comes of percussion on the coions, and this moisture so many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous whites, and such happens more;
and these are the signs of distemper this gathered together, for if it is or white as we have said, then it is the apostemes reons, that is to say, short and like an ox, and does not open the coions, because it has moisture all over.
And if there is moisture in the proper toil, then it is the apostemes reons with a part of the uff, and for this one thinks that it is some other uff;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syfac, so does it smell bad; so when you know how to determine the color of the moisture, test it on all the inguinal region, because its form is before. According to this, who comes after the inguinal region, judge what is inside.
According to this, who comes after the inguinal region, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then make him lie on his back on a high thing, and put a lot of blankets on him;
then make him sit on his left side, and command the server to sit at his right, and spread the girdle over one of the two hips on the armpit of the scrotum;
and take the spatule and peel the skin of the cow among them to the long until you reach the knuckle, and let your cut be straight in peeling the skin of the cow up to its white, and scorch it carefully according to the place.
then pierce the skin of the cow flat with water at a large hole, and extract all the water, and then put your nails, and raise the skin up; and do not touch the hair of the cow but only the skin itself; peel it piece by piece carefully so that if you don't peel it well enough, the water will come back.
and if the skin springs back to your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished working on the skin; and join together the two skins of the cow with one stitch, then heal it like the other wounds until it is well.
And if you find that the skin is corrupted by another disease, then you must hang the vail that covers it, in doubt of the corruption of blood; and peel the cow's side at all the vail, and extract the skin, and heal it as we have said.
And if the water is mixed in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then cover the other part likewise as you have done with the first, then wash the blood away and put in another wound wet in oil.
and put elsewhere another wet wool in wine and oil, and put on the two branches, and cover with double cloths, and lay it on all the chain which is according to this form:
Then take 2 cloths, and stuff them with sheepskin according to this shape, and are joined by stitching in the loin of the pants, and one of the shoulders rests on the base until the back, and the other at the shoulder part; and the other two heads rest on the 2 angles, and is all assembled by the loop of the pants;
and there is no time that this medicine of the ramice of cautery in the place of a size of iron, and it is that you press 1 cautery scalpel, and cope the leather of the branches, and is heated as we have said, so that the white syrup that contains the water is uncovered;
If you use the fire cautery as described in this chapter, pierce it with needles, and burn it with this subtle fire cautery.
And coat it in all the ways you can, until it is completely dry; and be careful that the fire does not touch the urethra; and know that this operation is safer; and do not let blood flow from the incisions.
and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or bleeding or another thing; then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what is said before.
and if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then know that when you are sure by the signs we have said that the ramose water is present,
If you set the patient on fire at .i. seat take off; then pierce the abscess in the part of the buttock to all of the skin large, and put the piercing from the long neck; and let the openings be wide so that all the water runs out.
then put cotton in the place, and tie it on, and leave it to run the remaining water out, then cure it until the wound is healed;
and if the wound does not allow water to run out of it through the mouth of the wound, then you should put a feather or an instrument used to draw out water from the dropsy there; and widen 1/7 of the wound, and know that the water returns, and is collected again after 5 days or so, and when it has been assembled as before, and in this way the patient will get better after his days.
of the abscess with nails
I am aware that in this chapter of the herb, there are many fears; so I think it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from riding horses, and most often from sitting; and this happens for the most part.
This is to be understood: by acrid and bitter superfluity that is spread in the bowels, or from impact; or
and is the color of the appendix according to the color of the heart; and does not ache, and the appendix is painful.
and in some cases there is a painful and painful appendix with an unusual color and never comes from a nerve or swelling of a vein.
When it is from a nerve, if it is known by the position of the appendix, when you press it with your fingers; and only comes when you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d'enflure de voix est connu par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux.
and can do well on this scale, and on the other characters; and is that you put the cure on the scale, then the egg at the top, and the trial strong of the white liquid, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already soded with these new characters, then it is convenient that you take the egg and its cure;
and if it is dry, or in those who are inside the vessels, you must deliver all that is held, and the cup resonates.
And if the birth of the child is behind, you must cope all, and extract the amniotic fluid, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, if you apply wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, then apply other treatments until it heals.
from the appendage of the testicles
This is the translation of the provided text: and the patient groans when he goes;
and the treatment for this disease is so well prepared that it is like the one before, with great fear;
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you have the sick person sit on .i. a healing mat, then pour the suspension of the seeds down your throat on both sides, all the vessel that are next to the penis, and make them turn and extend them correctly;
then chop the spatula with a sharp edge on both sides of the vessel, as much as it is uncovered,
and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then I take an awl or it has .i. a double thread, and fasten it to the first hole where his sight is coming, and fasten it soon to the other head. Then cut the skin in the middle right, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound like the others, so that no vassal cries out because one of his joints is not moving;
For by this there comes no harm, and all the vassals come with their joints, so it is necessary to draw the joints of all the vassals; that so they do not lose their nutrition by cutting the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the syrup The following are the avemen of this chapter: that so by section there comes out syrup, or extension on the belly in the part of the entrails, by which the intestines descend from that section to one of the loins;
and this section is where the syrup comes out, or the extension of it, and these .iij. ways come from causes: from percussion, from jumping, from braying, from lifting a heavy load, and by similar things;
and the signs when it's about the extension of the medicine, if it's that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come all at once; and the abscess is even until the end, so that the medicine rushes to the intestine.
And the signs are when it's about the section of the medicine, that it brings on sudden pain, and the abscess appears different, showing through the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the course of the medicine going away from the abscess.
And there is no time for the circle to come with the intestine, and it is kept in place, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron from fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
And the manner of the bandage is that you command the patient that he keep his intestines in his hand at the wound, if he can reinsert them; then wrap it tightly around his neck between your hands, and gently remove the bowels;
then raise it up, and strip off all the skin of the intestines; and bottle within the loins of the waist according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the oil can come out.
and scorch away the leech that is on the skin of the genitals, as long as the white leech's flesh is uncovered from all sides;
and bottle the two fingers together in that which is beneath the genitals, in that which is between the white leech's flesh that is uncovered from the skin of the scrotum, and between the second white leech;
and depart that which is behind the scrotum, and between the second white leech; and then move your right hand within the loins of the waist, and place the white leech at the top of your left hand, and hold the skin of the scrotum in front of the right hand; and command to the minister that he extends the bow upward, and to dislodge who is behind the tie.
and feel your two sides if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white syfac hard, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the belly desoz;
then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part dou syfac, which is after the leather of the testicles; after the size, then cut the hair that appear of the threads, until there are .iiij. threads; then put together one on top of the other in a cross-shape, and tie the syfac, of which we have said is desoz the leather of the testicles, with a strong thread of .ij. parts; Then wrap the heads of the fillets and bind them together with .ij. parts, so that none of the vassals who feed them can enter into us, for the abscesses don't come out. and attach it very firmly according to the first long .ij. of that, and after these .ij. strings leave a little gap which is large enough for the staff of two;
and after all the rest according to the roundness that the horse carries; then cut in the part which is in contact with the skin of the saddles, until it no longer hurts, and bend it as we have said above;
Then put moist wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and there put the string that we have spoken of. And no time is cauterized with white of egg that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the ligament as long as it is stretched by itself; and if it delays in stretching, then let it be raised by hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it stretches.
then heal the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed.
from hernial hernia
I have never seen anyone who dared to make a cure with fire.
And the ancient ones said that it is done like this, as one ties together the rope, in a similar way to how you tie the ropes, after cutting them very lightly at the end.
Then cut it short, and heal the abscess from this one who is wounded, as much as the ropes flow; and heal it as we have said, until he is well.
No times comes the ruture of the angers, as we have said, and open them; and do not let any of the intestines come out, and if any come out, it is little, and repair every hours; and for l’afaire de li corc, il i a poc pour le mal, et s’il en i plus, ne le par, car c’est mortel.
and wherever it stays too long at this point, he believes the wound or syrup, as long as the intestines go out.
and if by extension of the syrup which is in the arteries, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells up its veins and openings;
and the cure if it is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is cured with iron in this way:
and that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then spread the salt along the line of the wound according to the quantity of iij. dos;
and then remove the medicine which is above the skin that follows, and then take the rod and place it on the apparent place of the medicine;
and then press it perfectly in the belly, and cut the .ij. apparent lines of the medicine on top of the head of the rod, and cut both;
and then remove the head of the rod, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the رمیه of the intestines;
and then cure it with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the hairs, if the wound is well and the wound is healed.
The syrup is constricted, and has no appearance in the laceration; the cautery is moistened in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening the leather of the shoes
Often, the leather of the shoes becomes soft in certain men, so that the nuts that are inside are softened and can be seen; and it is a craft, when you clean them, to put the bad nut on his back, and soften the leather which is natural over it; then assemble the 1.2. lips at one seam, and cut off the excess, seam by seam, firmly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and tie the thread.
of chastisement
Saiches that chastisement is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary to speak of it only in two ways: one is that the horse should answer when questioned about its own cure; and the other is that, since we often have needed to chastise certain animals for our aid, such as sheep, goats, and dogs and others. Therefore I say that chastisement is done according to these two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the horse sit in warm water until its joints are softened; then grasp them with your hand until they have recovered and you no longer feel them. From the taunting of the size: it is necessary that you tan the animal, and press the leather of its joints to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and cut each hoof one at a time when you have well dried them; and do not leave any pot of strong medicine and subtle medicine that is over the hoofs; and this way of chastisement is milder than the one done by attraction, because it may happen that something of the joints is lost in the latter, through which the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it has healed.
I have never seen them before.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
of the tetanus
of the tetanus
of the erratic
of the erratic
Of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the first sentence translated:
"Mestier est premier à la baile que l'on connaisse la figure de l'enfantement naturel, et les signes qu'il est quant l'on voit la femme s'approcher et désirer sentir l'odeur du pain ; alors le bébé se précipite ; ainsi tu sais que cet enfantement est selon la figure naturelle, et l'enfant sort par le haut, avec le deuxième ; et lorsque tu vois ces signes, il convient de presser légèrement son ventre, afin que l'enfant naisse rapidement ; car lorsqu'il descend sur le haut du corps, le deuxième arrive avec lui, et la naissance a lieu naturellement ; les excréments sortent en même temps par une bonne purification. Et ce qui vient autrement ne vient pas naturellement. Car il ne vient jamais par les jambes, ni par le cou, ni par les mains, ni par le ventre, ni par la tête, car il arrive parfois sur le col, et par d'autres figures méchantes ; il est donc utile à la baile de savoir comment aider dans ces situations, en évitant les erreurs et les tromperies. Je vous montrerai toutes les figures comment on doit procéder."
If the baby comes out naturally and the mother cries out, then the virtues of her loins are weak, if she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and when his oil or fenugreek is cooked, then pour the milk between her two small testicles, of which this is the shape: And split the second one, and cover his fingernail with oil until the moisture comes out; and press her belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, then clisterize the woman with fenugreek oil and sesame oil; then make her sit up and shake off the mucus, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then now the baby. If his hands are hard to enter, then put the woman on a .i. seat, and let her stand on her feet; then take the seat away from the ground, and turn the woman over, so that she does not fall when she stands up; and if his hands cannot come in, and the baby dies, then cover his hands with the knife that is placed here before, and pull out the baby, and make it even.
of the baby's delivery on its feet When the baby comes out on its feet, if it is necessary to put it upside down: and then turn slowly, as long as they are even;
Then squeeze and stretch little by little.
So that it can jump just as the fingers are stretched, if it is ordered to stretch, and make it vibrate with the hand. If you jump, then God will see you.
And if it is not so as we said, if the turn slowly and little by little until it is according to the natural shape. For then he is lightly.
And if it does not come so as we said, if one takes muscle of elder, and oil of santonica, and gum melted, and grinds all in a mortar. and put on the nature of the woman within and away this ointment, Then let it sit in warm water until it soaks through the ribs.
and when it is soaked through, then let it be wrapped in a piece of cloth, and leave it alone for an hour; then let it sit on a pillow, then let him shake and hold his mouth and nose closed, and squeeze his stomach lightly, because the attack is now over. of the birth of the child on its knees. When the child arrives in this form, if I put his hands on his hips little by little;
the delivery of the baby who comes out wide a hand during I come to repair to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, if the woman does not lift her leg, and go.
Here is the translation of the first sentence in the text:
and then apply the muscle stretching that I have described;
and if she is pregnant, then make her sit down on a chair, and study how to bring the baby into the world; and then make the child face up according to natural form, and have him stretch out, and instruct him that he should stretch out until the baby comes out;
of the issue of the child upon his neck, and had spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back It is necessary that the doctor wash his hands, then turn his palm slightly at a time, and wipe it lightly.
and when he is even, put the ointment of salt and oil on it, as we have said, then order him to move slightly.
and when you have done this, if the face sit on the seat, and order him to bend it; and the face shakes. of this method of treatment for all the second part
of this method of treatment for all the second part When it comes to this way of treating all the second part, if you wrap up your finger with cloth so that there is no moisture, then
and if it is wrapped around his face and neck, and the cloth is pulled tight so that it doesn't slip, and the man dies;
and then put the child inside, as well as you can, and instruct the woman not to weep:
of the origin of twins Says that twins are often born, and never born only once or twice; and this is not a strange thing, but happens often. Two are strange things, and do not live long, if their names are not known.
I know that they are many, and are dislocated by the fire that is applied to them, which is attached to the wood.
and never happen naturally like all of us do, as we have said.
And if it happens gradually, as we have said, and be careful and make it quickly and lightly that what she does; and do so as it deserves for salvation. of children
of children Many times the formation is done in the womb i.e. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii. or viii. or ix. or x. up to xv. and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
and know that the ball knows everything because by chance similar things come; so do according to what is fitting for him.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman whose child has died and her womb is still, as I said in the chapter on delivery, and she does not deliver, and you are forced to use your hands; if it is necessary for you to know that the woman is of sound health, and there is no accident where she might fear death;
if it is necessary that the woman be seated on her heels, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised;
and let the minister treat the rash of one-half, or she will lie in bed so that she is not treated with the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil with musk and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscadines; then pour into the vagina lightly, then choose one-half of the oil or she pours in that is suitable for this,
and take care if it is dressed and arranged so that it falls on his head; if it pricks its eyes or its throat or its mouth or its palate or its larynx or near the ribs,
and if it falls on its feet, it sticks itself or grabs and hurts near the ribs;
and it should hold the object with its right hand, and place the claw between the index and middle fingers of its left hand, and gently stick the object onto something empty;
then place 1/8th of an ounce, or thereabouts, on each joint, so that the extractions are equal;
and then extend them evenly in both directions, so that they come out, and the joints hold together, as this is the form:
If one part stops, then oil some of its two ends and pour oil on that part, and draw the other part;
and if one doesn't stop, then put this ointment or higher up, and do so until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back because of the tightness, So that you wrap him in a cloth, until he is completely dry;
Then place the bandage at the joint of the foot or to the wrist, and in the other hand, do the same for the other leg;
And if the child's head is large and it is straining at the birth, or it has an acute ache If it is necessary for you to place the thorny spatule between your two, and to draw out the sharp head; Or take it with the instrument which is called "almidah", from which comes the form with the instruments or paste which follows this one;
and so also I make it grow naturally with a sharp head; and then draw the bones with nails,
and if the head jumps out, and is pulled by force, so it is cut off, as long as the moisture which was there comes out.
and if it cannot come out, so split it into pieces that you can take out.
and if it is puffed up in the belly or over the ribs, so that you pierce it as long as the moisture flows out.
And if it is stuck to its own pieces, so that the pull is light, and it is brought up to the mouth of the mare with ease.
And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, so that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and making the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that it contains;
and if another member is dislocated and the head remains in place, so that the hand of the person who grabs it completely leaves the arm, and he pulls it to the mouth of the arm, and I will pour one measure of wine or water, and let it rest;
and if his mouth is tight with a hot plague that has come to him, so that he cannot work, then must be provided moist and greasy things; and provide them with plasters, and cut in water,
And if it strikes him on his side, and you can put it in line, then bring the child that we have spoken of in the living child.
and if one does not have power, so one would be a man, and leave nothing of the second.
And when you have done this, bring the following that we have spoken of in the chest, which comes from the mare;
and if it comes from the sea, then put it in water and hold it back, and bring other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose womb had dead babies, then another咨询 on that one, and rejected the death of the others. After a long time, the wound swelled and began to putrefy.
I was called in to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't close the wound.
I put on a strong poultice, and it took some time, then another one. I marveled much at this, for the belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to heal the wound, and with great care, until the woman's condition improved somewhat; and waited for the woman to be a little longer, and there was a little bow in place;
and I have written this chapter on the ointment except for one thing, that when the master sees a strange thing, he may know how to help.
How to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Here follows the form of the pressor, how one should hold the books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two legs. Nevertheless, the horns should be thinner than the restrictory part, and made of elm or boxwood; and
and his mouth of fur 1 . i . two broad , and the margin of the trees 1 . i . must , and long a palm and a half; and the 15  . ij  . leemnes be two ajostemens of this same fur  , which are closed on one side and on the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
and these two ajostemens are closed in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the 15   . ij   . horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the teeth; and let there be .ij. joints .ij. supports, if you see, of a palm long, and .ij. two wide;
and when you open the pelvis with all the instrument, if sit down the woman on 1 . i . bed, the legs during and the legs open, then put together  .ij. supports in the pelvis, and hold the head of the instrument between her hips; then open your hand with all the instrument, if you have done it as nails evenly, according to the quantity that you open the mouth of the pelvis, until the ball goes out what she wants.
All these instruments are completely assembled, and varied according to their appearance; and when you have put them together, the operation is all the more quick and all the higher in terms of quantity.
If you do not prepare these instruments, it is not excusable because of their necessity.
When the second is held back at birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to keep her hair in place, and then make her sneeze with a pinch, and hold her hands away from her mouth and nose; and si tu veu l’assaincre avant qu’il naisse, il est necessaire que tu mandes au malaide qu’il leure de sa mere par ses nages, et puis tu le feras s’assaincre par ton aise. and if he cries because of the pain, it is good. And if she does not cry, it is necessary that you command the patient to let go of her hair, and then make her sneeze with a pinch, and hold her hands away from her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of the pain, it is good.
If not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as calamus, rut, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
all of these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or put in water on the fire; then place a stick or lid over the pot, and another one at the mouth of the wound,
and let the vapor come out from inside the wound; then make him sneeze, as we have said. If so, immediately. And if it remains after this treatment and does not get better, order the nurse to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk of aloes, and then let it dry out in the air.
and when she has found it, if she pulls it and extends it little by little properly, so that the joint does not move at all during extraction; but it must be moved lightly from side to side, and then pulled; but it will come out easily.
And if the patient's mouth is dry, we have spoken of the treatment of swallowing, and of inhaling the smoke of herbs;
and if it is not of all those which we have said, so that you do not go astray in the treatment.
but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then the cautery with fourfold ointment;
if she gets up and comes again, but nevertheless, when she lies down, if it causes a bad smell in the stomach and in the head of the sick person, and bleaches the sick person.
So that it is necessary to apply appropriate fumigations: neither of the ancient medicines have proven effective in fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument, so it is smoked with the retention of the flowers and the second, if this is:
And it is like to see a dog, and put the top fine in nature, and wide-set on fire;
and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet felt the foundation pierced, but it has been stopped by a subtle medicine. If it is necessary for the bailiff to pierce that subtle medicine at his right hand, and he does not pierce it with a spikelet, and bind the lacing so that it does not touch him;
then dip in dry land in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until he is well.
And if you doubt that it will not return, put or pierce a stick of wood, and leave his hands open, and let it be broken when the child walks in the chambers.
And never comes a sudden shock of pain from the wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover that shock: if not, let it be treated as we have said in the book of plied wine.
of the fistula at the foundation Fistulas that come from the base are hard and painful, and those that come from the space between the 10th and 11th parts, or in the space between the 7th and 8th parts,
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, if opened, and with cool water or a thin bow, or
and never does this produce any fistula; and it is known by whom it is that there is effusion or windiness when the patient has effusion, and perhaps in jumping up.
and if it is a fistula that enters just up to the bladder, and just up to half the penis; and it reaches up to the join of the scrotum, and just up to the nape of the neck.
And so one knows that a fistula is perforating at the base, and not perforating: and it is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine silver or iron needle into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is a twist, then I pour a fine paste, or .i. horsehair, until you feel the paste or hair in your mouth;
and if you do not feel it, and does not come out of the perforation, windiness or pain, as we have said: that it does not pierce, but be careful in your treatment.
And if the fistula is piercing until the bladder or the conduit of the urine, so that when it urines, it cannot hold back by medicine.
She is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, so let it be brought up to the place. if there is no twisting and the pain comes from within, that it has already been drawn out by bowing, and there is no medicine or quick remedy by touch;
and in these persistent pustules there is no cure except work, and the vain vanity of foolish mirages that interfere with them.
In those that are not persistent and are not old, there is hope of health by travel, as I have experienced,
and so the sick person lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs until they reach his thighs, and lets his thighs bend toward his belly; then pour a tent of water, or of mud if there is curvature, until you know where the tent comes from.
Then let the sick person lie on his back with his feet toward the foundation, and so that you put your two fingers.
then feel that the tent has been perceived; and whether it is covered or not between your thumb and forefinger, then you know that it is persans; If not treated, they cannot be healed.
One should treat all of them well, but this is difficult to do; however, it can be done for some.
And the aid that can be given is to heat the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is said above. And the bottle should be brought up hot in the fistula until it comes out clean from the bottom; and do this .ij. times or .iij., until you know that these charred feathers are burned, which look like an owl's feather.
and then the healer of damp tents wets, until it chatters, and then the healer of ointment grinds and binds.
If he is thus healthy, that's good. If not, otherwise he cannot be healthy;
and if he tries it between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the root, and at the bottom of the tent there is a thick covering of hair or of silk, and you see the fistula to that one who ensues in the covering from two sides; If the cover of the encumbrance of the fistula, and seals it tightly before the tent, and then treat the cauterization after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the trial, and chertitude; then curse those birds' nests that seem a quill of an owl, and remain nothing.
And if the sun does not go out, and cut between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicinal water.
For the fire cauteryجمعت اثنين من الأشياء الصعبة: حرق هذه الرؤوس المتشابكة، ووقف نزيف الدم الناتج عن فتحة العمود الفقري، وجفاف الإفرازات.
and then the cure of wet tents will dry or fry them, as long as they pour water on it, and put fire to these heads in the water;
then heal the wound with herbs and dry remedies.
For when it is restored, then is healed and does not return again.
And if the fistula comes up to the very foundation, and is separated from the body, it should be cut off at the root, and see this.
If you feel the tickle, and enter. There are three ways to administer it:
ou tu le cauterizes so com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc'a fons, ou sè tu pês si i met tentes et cure si com premier;
and don't go too deep, so you don't cut the foundation that holds it, and let the discharge come out by itself with a gentle push; then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; in case it gets worse, or you remove the covering and clean it completely from the foundation, or with a tool, point it; and then my true faith this wood from the wound, as well as you can.
Then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the distant part of the foundation: this is lighter for the patient.
And never are fistulas according to this method; and is when you plug the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation of the leather above, if you take a perforated tent at the top according to this form: And I pour one part of salt into two parts of water, and pour the liquid in the funnel into all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, so that you pour your two or foundation.
and tie the head of the thread, and join together all the seven joints together, and separate one from another, and leave it for a day or two days;
and restrain it not at all, until the thread has passed between those that are two, and they rub;
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
if the fistula does not pierce, if you can make it pierce in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too completely closed.
For it does not fit to make the lacing cover completely, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spinus bone out of which one makes the fistula if it is sharp and pointed; and on the other hand no, for this reason we do not cover what we should not cover, as you see here:
are according to its manner: they are inside the fundament, also like grain of resin, and have small and large ones, and cut them at an angle. and if there is one or more, and are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture, so they are hard and sharp, and cause pain when they press upon anything.
and then again where there is a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and it has the color of the flesh.
and the treatment for those who have them deep in the foundation, so that you command the patient to sweat by going to bed, as long as the foundations go away and the seeds are released; if you hurry, and cut it like nails, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then chop it at its roots;
and if the ligature cannot hold them in place due to moisture, take them with .i. drapeil, or cotton, or a piece of chamelon; and take them from your two hands, then chop them, and powder them on some hot powders that are in the place of cauterization; or you cauterize them as said or with the paste of cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, so cauterize the patient with a caustic and bitter paste to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
and if the patient's wound is deep, and his bones are strong, then the cure is lighter; and it is that you press them with your fingernail or tweezers, and pick them up, then clean them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the suture together in this way: take a .i. twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then wind the thread around the top of the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the .ij. ends of the thread through the needle, and if it is wide; and tighten the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same to all of them, and leave 1 to stop the blood flow;
then put on the foundation .i. cloth moistened with oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it rest until it has healed, and when it is healed, if they treat with ointment and other treatment, as long as it is healthy.
Do not cut off the hair at the root. Many times the hair falls out at the roots, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
If you rub the point of a spitball or your nail on your fingernail, which does not let it get moist; and treat him as long as he is sore, as it fits.
and if he cannot be made well, then begin to shave again more strongly than before, until the skin has healed and is burnt. and treat him as long as he is well.
and the pain will go away. Fingers are a small appearance in front of the body, and they grow very well.
And never does the vein burst, and one feels it as if dead, and it spreads throughout the whole body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a strong vulture, and place that feather on the wound, until it turns purple all around. Then turn your hand over the feather completely until you have covered the entire wound, and seal it completely, and rub the wound from its roots.
And if you see, so make it of iron or brass according to this shape, and be subtle in size and run on top:
and do not pierce it, so that you keep it in two, and press it; And if you see, so cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire-cauterizing:
of the shape of the blister No one should make a blister of silver or brass, or of melted lead or quicksilver; nor should you make these small and large instruments according to the needs of those who will use them.
These children, then, who are weak and suffer pain, are small.
The shape of the catheter is small and great it is over wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and I have an opening or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the chest is pierced through one side, and on the other.
and the belly or I put the medicine of a bottle of wine or parchment, and is pierced all around small openings,
and between each hole there should be a space, then pour into these holes a strong thread of twisted wire in 10 or in winding it around, and join the abdomen as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, so that the instrument lies in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and it is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or olive oil or some other substance is applied to the head of the cauterizer, then pour it lightly:
and then the minister applies the cauterizer to his both hands together until it is completely filled, and then removes the cauterizer, and places the patient's legs against the wall,
and if he sleeps all night, then it is a greater help.
And if you cauterize him with the disease of decay in the belly, and the medicine is hastened to come out, if it is repeated as long as he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, so the cauterization is as subtle as for a child;
and this is the shape of the subtle cauterization where the skin is tightened:
of wounds
We have spoken above of the treatment of wounds; now we will speak of the treatment of hands and medicines, according to the process.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and for this reason they are made.
The things for which wounds are made are by the striking of a stone, or the height of a spear or a knife, or a lance or a staff or a sword, or similar things;
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
"Here are the directions for treating various wounds according to the sections of the text:
"I say that when a simple wound appears on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is from falling from a height or from similar causes, and the skin is partly torn and the wound is large:  " and you doubt slightly about the abscess: if it is little blood from the wound that comes to the head, and the blood goes in the opposite direction of the part that has been pricked;
and let the patient abstain from wine and meaty foods.
And if he does not drink, if his meat is diminished, and he drinks no wine, neither does he eat cheese;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, cotton wetted with oil or wine of stinging;
and if there is no abscess, if it is put on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if the fire has moved it, if it is put on some ointments, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, if they are brought together by sewing, as I will say for wounds from the belly, from the sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it stands out, and it holds only a little, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore it with hard leather instead of skin. and command the patient to eat large meats, as tested and baked wheat, also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find or burn rust, and it has not reached the bone, then chop off all of it, and throw it away, and then cure it;
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find a dislocation, like the thread of a rope; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put this powder into them so that it hardens in such a way that the fire moves it.
And the method of this powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood 3 parts; live coal 2 parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it is well healed and has joined together all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it undissolved, if it swells; for the medicine should not be applied until it is healed.
And one should not do any castor oil, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but that the arm has not moved the wound.
And if the arm has moved the wound, surely it is infected, even if one does not put any of this powder on it.
but put on some distilled water, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals. Then treat with other remedies until it is well.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with very small tweezers;
and I will tell you after this about the fractures of the head.
of the wound in the throat
The wound in the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is cut.
If it is a newborn, if there is no other device but to leave the healing, and do not put any restraint, for it hurts the newborns and makes them retreat. and do not place on the wound anything is cold, for the substance of the newborns is cold, and their flow is with the skull, which is the most high limb;
but let the medicine be made, if like hot water in soft water, and mixed with oil of roses, and washed too in soft water; and other stones of mineral according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then the cure until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the wound is full of bowels, if it pierces or goes deeper;
And if the artery is cut, and blood loss occurs, if it becomes dark, and the blood stops, and the cauterization is done properly;
And if the throat is cut, or if it bleeds, and the direction is kept, so that the meat does not spoil; If cautery is applied to the chin of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then slowly remove it, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with herbs until it is healthy again;
and if there has been an impression of the bone, then apply pressure to it; and if there are pieces of bone, then if you can't hold them fast, and those that you cannot hold fast, leave until the wound has pus; and let the discharge be kept under control;
if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I have described. If there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as described in my chapter on the powder.
of the wound from a sword or an axe
If it is a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then observe the patient’s breathing: for thus you shall know that the wound is deadly.
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh in all its strength, then put the powder on him at first hour, nor bind him with bandages so that he does not die completely. and return to bed, and let the patient rest. but I put on a wound dressing, and bind it three times a day.
and if you have no wound, put wet cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
and let the patient lie on the wound 1 . i . jurs, or 1 . iiij., or more times; if there is no spasm, no bad trembling of the heart or strange movements; and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Treat the ulcers of tents and other cures as long as he is healthy;
and if it cannot be healed, and operate, then know that there are fistulas; so heal it as one should.
And if the wound is an incision with a blade or knife, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then heal what is before;
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has caused pieces to come off, then heal the wound, and the deep wounds if they are not healed; and if they are not removed, let the wound run its course, and the extractions are uniform.
and for other wounds and other limbs the judgment is as we have said.
double rupture of the abdomen
The double rupture of the abdomen is great, middle, and small;
from the great wound, no less often than the intestines, or where the intestines are located, so that there is no intrusion of water;
and the stitch is more difficult and no less painful than the small wound rather than the large one;
For this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless it is hot, and we do not put them back from cold to hot; for the intestines swell sometimes so that they feel the cold, so let us put them back more often;
and because this causes the internal wound, because it keeps the intestines in their place while others...18.
And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways:
the common stitches in the abdominal stitch have...
and the stitches of other wounds on the chest and other common private stitches are common to...
and all the ways they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, and good thing is of the remedy, this is by one of the two ways: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, For where the intestines are swollen because of the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this way: moisten a sponge or .i. damp rag barely wet with cold water only, or you cook in cold milk and garlic and spice, and raise the intestine as long as the swelling is open;
and never stops doing this restraining, and becomes soft that it is empty for deflating.
And when you see the swelling disappear, if you moisten the intestine with water or salt and cook it well, for by this it is stiffened at little of something;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument that is used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to let it bleed. that we do not chop off unless there is great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
If you cut yourself in a corbeau, don't run away, and look at the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have broken out, if you reset it according to the natural form in its proper place, if you can do so, for this is a difficult thing.
When the wound is wide, and is in the part of the loins below the belly, if you make the patient lie on their back. and place their legs higher than their head; and is in the part of the loins below the belly,
and also if a rupture from the belly is in the lower of the .ij. parts if you find that the part that is torn is higher than the other part;
and thus one should treat what I say here for great and small wounds.
Here is a translation of the text line by line:
and then place your hand over it. Let the minister with the knife come to your aid who will pierce all the wound from side to side with his knife, and gather the lips together; and this is the common way of sewing,
and this is the common way of sewing, and is that you squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound 1/4 inch, and thread a needle or there is 1/2 inch good strong thread; and pierce the 1/4 inches of skin with the 1/2 inch of thread,
and pull out a double thread through the needle from both sides, and then put together the  .ij. heads of the wound in front of,
and then leave  1.2 inches of space between, and then put another needle, and then cut the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles, until all the wound is closed up;
and the needles are small and large, For the fine needles pierce all the ship, and the too large ones cannot enter well. for so it comes that they are little.
and does not come to put the needles too far from the side of the ship and the hide.
that they pierce and open the wound in front of the stitch
and then cut off the heads of the needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or drapes on the heads of the needles to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing the needles is more convenient for small wounds, for he had suffered a needle or .ij.
The second stitch is common, and is that you join together the .ij. stitches of the leather and the .ij. stitches of the medicine with a sharp needle or he has a .i. strong thread; and when you have pierced these stitches all together,
and when you have pierced these stitches all together, If I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that one sews thread.
and space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller thread;
this stitch is made by the man,
and I sew an opening that has been made or a wound,
who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and there were well over two palm's width of intestines,
and the wound was on his abdomen. I took out the intestine then it had been  .xxiiij. hours.
and was sewed up just after .xv. days, and I treated it, and was healed.
And the miracle was that the mirror had been broken, and yet he lived.
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where one cannot find it, nor any medicine. and put on more cotton wool 11 times a day, and wash with honey water until it is healed.
I will tell you the 11 proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle, and thread it from the outside of the wound inward.
When it has pierced the skin on the right side, if you have sewn or stitched where you pierced with the needle,
and pierce it from another side from within to where it is far.
and understand this stitch that you also sew like the skin-peeler does with the fur, and leave the medicine on one side and reapply it on the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen explains properly,
if it is like any other fountain, which unites the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main drugs to another in such a way:
file an awl or tip of mirach near, and pierce that one only, and leave the two parts of the syrup; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part all the way to the inside. as a doctor.
then pierce the other one from outside part all the way to inside, in two more chiés with needle that are on other side of the body;
and this is the method of suturing and it is most common.
Galens says so of this word, and no one testifies against it.
One should sew the belly with .ij. needles or thread in each.
And one should put the needle from one side and the other, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles.
and know that when the tear is in the middle of the belly, If the stitch is more painful than other stitches from the belly.
The judgments of the wound if they are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, If the intestine is pushed back and the cut is made, then put the powder on and cover it up,
If the intestine is pushed back and the cut is made, then put the powder on and cover it up, and if it moves again, place it on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes. and cut the cord, and let the sutures and mirrors be; then heal the wound as you would any other, until it is well.
and if you have no medicines, place cotton wool on it, as soon as it begins to come off, and shake it .ij. times a day as long as it is healthy.
For you do not need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, if you wet another light member in hot oil, or in rose oil, and set the arms, and stretch out the legs;
If he feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and often happens if the black wine enemas are used, and sometimes putridity comes up to the intestine;
and pierces it, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The intestinal tract called "jejunum" cannot heal once it has been torn. is due to the presence of veins and the subtlety of the entire body, as well as the nearness of its essence to that of the young.
And if the wound heals quickly, then it is like the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it becomes dark and putrid, so that you can see the black spot that causes it to rot, then For there are veins and arteries.
and then cut who is between the line, and place the two shoulders hanging from the part of the wound until far away so as to facilitate the extraction when the zephyr blows, and the wound swells.
from the cut on the brow
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some ways,
For I have seen some honor that a noble man or a warrior's belly was pierced by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen; and became a fistula, and there was an emission and wind.
I used the information I had to treat him, and did not stop applying the poultice until he was well, and bound up the wounds.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient had done him harm in his belly; and he had no illness, but he recovered in good health, and eating and drinking well;
and said no experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied in some way: Take the skin from a large testicle, and then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the skin has opened the mouth, so it is placed on the .iij. lips,
then you put another one in that same way as before, until the wound is completely healed;
and cut the wound; This passage seems to be describing a surgical technique for treating intestinal wounds without causing any harm to the patient. The text is in Old French and dates back to the 12th-13th centuries.
and can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the head of this thread of intestine that is not yet shredded, and then tie at the head of this thread. i. a very fine linen thread, twisted, Then dip the thread in the needle, and cut the intestine, and pull it through the slit.
and this method of suturing frets is valid only as long as the vein and the hope remain;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no more cure than surgery.
for fistula or wherever it is That all wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are called universally "fistula". and most often when it is cut and the blood runs.
And a fistula is according to the theory of vital force, hard and white, so that one does not feel pain, and it is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
and not once in a clear sky, and another time in thick fog; ne either time, and another time enough;
and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no is only by one of these seven causes:
This is the translation of the provided Old French text: or, because of its malice. or, because it has hard teeth and lips, so that it does not let them grow. or, where there is too much bowels. If the legs are swollen, and the material is of bad quality. the medicine is not good for the cure; or because corruption is a way to cause disease; or because property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already described all these causes, and the signs, and remedies of medicines in the dissection.
Or it is necessary that I should inform you of the cure for fistula, which is made by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body; For there are fistulae which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves. or in the belly, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the back bone, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas which are of this kind are of great difficulty in healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come up to the level that I have said, and you have begun to heal it, and if you see it clearly, take a piece of leather or iron, if the fistula is straight, try it out.
and if the fistula is twisted, try it out with a thin piece of leather. For the plons are wetted by the rain in the tortuosity.
and if they pricked with a sharp needle and you cannot see it well by the tent, if the cautery is applied to one of the punctures,
For if the moisture comes from one puncture to another, and cleanses it;
and then you will have bleeding under control, that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and it is shaved completely,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you know for sure the place, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; or in some cases that I have told you, if the cup is according to what I said,
or in some cases that I have told you, if the cup is according to what I said, and there are bones broken and rusted wheels that are within; and then the cure until it is healed,
and its fistula is very deep from the right side, so that you cut it perfectly, as well as you can, then dip them wet in medicinal vinegar, and pour them up to the head of the fistula,
then dip them wet in medicinal vinegar, and pour them up to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the excess that is held up at the bottom.
and then I put oil-of-olives on holy chalk, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not made well with this, then burn with fire, as we have said.
and if the nose is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off. If a vein is injured or a limb is broken, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, let the king wait until the corruption is completely bone; then heal of things that trouble him as long as he is well;
and if he is not well, and reset it in the same way as before; saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:
since you have not yet gone down to the well, and remove all corruption, then restore the joint;
and if it is healthy, that is good. If not, know that corruption is complete, so you cannot come. if there is no other device than to weaken by nature;
and if there is a small bone that has rotted, and you can pull it with tweezers, if the extraction is done with an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
and if he has one arm, if he can't walk, don't leave any of them.
if moisture makes him clumsy, and there is no mistake or fear, if he has pain and moisture and heat, and delivers the bones.
And if you don't remove them in an hour, put something that causes putrefaction on the wound, and leave it so long that the legs are inside the bones,
and then the bones will come together more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, if you only reset the corruption as long as the blackness is all bone, and then restore the wound;
and if there is much decay of the bone, and it comes up to the root of the bone; if it covers all the way to the root of the bone, and then heals it until it is solid;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg; so that you may obtain an example and aid for your work.
A young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from an cause that came from within the body,
As the matter came to the leg, and was driven out by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening;
However, because of his madness, he opened so much that the abscess opened; and when they corrode the matter, and become a fistula, and I came out of the breach that all go up bow and moisture from the chest;
and much mirth did I find cure in.1 . years, and there was no profit for me in the art of surgery,
for as long as I have been called, and saw his leg, and the medicines with which he was cured, and that which corrots through the breaches into the chest; and his body became red with youthfulness, and had a yellow color.
I lit a tent in one of those passages, and then searched all the passages,
and I found that one came out against the other on both sides of the leg.
I hurried then, and entered into one of the passages as far as I could see a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and putrid, and the putridness went as far as the bone inside.
I knew who showed me the rotten bone, and I made sure that there was no other corruption, except for the one that I had;
and I began to restore the wound with sodden medicines over a long period of time, and I could not seal it;
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before,
and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the sawdust, and then I sawed the bone, and leaned to weld the joint.
but I could not stop the blood flowing from a palm of the bone, and I carried it all the way down. then I treated it with medicine; and he was healed and welded firmly together.
and it was no longer necessary to warn against the danger of disease, which cannot stand, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For in the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was completely healed,
For in the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was completely healed, and he bore the name of an oss in place of his bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary in all things, nor did he have any ill will or desire to come.
and stretch out the head, so you pull down the broken piece, and uncover the cloth on the bed where you see silk, so that the silk does not stain the cloth. and put .i. log or a table under the body so as not to corrode the bed. and it is necessary so long as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, If you discover a char all; then put .i. a piece of ash
and then string one part to the other the corrosion, and is the stringing from the long of the corrosion .i. piece, if as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the joint corrupted, and string the bone or it contains of the other part;
and if the corruption is in the extension of the iij. joints, so there is not another ankle that from the copers;
and if it is corrupted by being poked in the hand or in the foot, for that is very painful. but you must certainly inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you;
and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and the shape of the teeth; and their grossness and fineness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. and for this it is appropriate that each instrument be prepared according to the appearance of the wound;
and knows that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the symptoms of the diseases; If you have a tool, think about what is necessary for it to work as intended.
double fire The head should be positioned either forward or backward,
and when you have the corrosive medicine to treat the disease, and it does not benefit, If it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corrosion comes, if the patient escapes from death or from evil, which is greater, through the failure of the member;
if the patient escapes from death or from evil, which is greater, through the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, and that they seem to be burned by fire, and then corruption of the member comes after darkness, and it continues from member to member, and cover with all the body; if you hurry too much,
and if it is by the impact of certain poisonous creatures, such as
the corrosion is at the top of the two, if the head, and give him no space to come to the hand.
And if it comes only to the hand, if the head is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come only to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, so the scythe to the sword; and if it passes the sword, then is death, and I know not any remedy that may be used save only the quantity of its virtue;
and so much is to be done as soon as the corrosion begins or it comes out: if it comes to the first joint, then the scythe goes beyond the next joint;
and if it comes out or it comes, then the scythe takes all of it; and if it ascends up the leg, so it copes to the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other thing but that the patient dies in pain;
and the way to cope or sew the limb so that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister of the two lines downstream, and another minister of the other line upstream, and you release the hook that is between the 17th and 22nd ribs to the 1st spermatile [testicle], as long as the bone is uncovered;
then the bandage or silk, and put a lin fabric on each side 1st sheet, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place, and brings another wound and abscess to the patient.
And if they pricked at their base, cauterize the place well. ou you place upon some powders restraining; then return to your medication as long as it is completed,
then lay the member naked of a linen bandage, and treat it as long as it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to one man in some place:
he had a blackness that seemed like fire burned him,
and that corrosion came first to his two toes, as long as she hurt all the foot;
and when the honor saw the corrosion, if he was burned with copper on the foot, and he was healed;
and a long time later the corrosion came to his two hands, and it came to me,
and I put on him things that rub against after cleansing the skin, and I cannot stop the corrosion;
and he said to me that I should let him cut off my hand, and I did not want, for I had hope of restoring the matter. and I also doubted that if I let him cut off his hand, he would not die, For the virtue of the man was weak; and he became desperate and returned to his own land, and he cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have no other account but for what one does otherwise, if it is necessary.
Now comes the apostem in dry meat, and delays so much that it makes great assembly of bowels; and then rot and perforate, and spring the bowels, and remain the vises, as our vassals do; and the leather that is above is also thin like .I. draperies loosed, and do not cut into bone, nor into the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in perfect fashion, then it is called a "fistula".
and the cautery should be that you cut all the way around, and even more so when it is thin, just like a flag. and does not burn because of its corruption.
And if you have promised that the leather will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the leather is hard like a shield, if the hot water cure is performed thus:
Look if her breasts are big, and the bow which she wears is of an offensive smell, So here is the translation of that sentence: Take ash, oil, and litharge, evenly, and put them to cook in a .i. vase on the fire, until the medicine is red, and also thick like honey;
and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and bind up the chest, and pinch the navel. and leave the medicine on for 1 . 2 hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this seven times, until the breast is red and swollen, and the bone is exposed;
and once more with water from ashes, Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
then pour it out, and make a paste, until you are certain that the breasts are well covered;"
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes of the vine; then make a paste of water and honey with a little bit of lime; Here is the translation of the text line by line: and the wine makes the wound bitter.
and when you have done this, and you have vowed that the breasts are well-mounded, so that the fire cautery of what gives birth to character in him,
and is that you press plaster finely, and the font with oil of roses and wine; or you dip it in some medications and herbs, which I have spoken about the properties of herbs for treating;
and if the nose is small, and the hole of the cautery cannot enter; if the ear is large, and put a tent of Egyptian oil in it; Here is the translation of the text line by line:
and if the wound is too wide, so that the sweat and i leave so much space that the poultice could enter,
and if the break is higher than the top, so that the cap or lower it more than i is. For when the break is perfect, so that it does not leave char; and if you cannot cover the loins of a woman as you see fit, how she should appear in such a way that her belly button is at the lowest possible level.
and if you cannot cover the loins of a woman as you see fit, Here is the translation of the first line of the text: and take medicines that consolidate it on the breast,
and are on a linen drape that covers the whole breast; then put pressure on the breast from the top; and place a cloth over the breast that is larger at the top, Here is the translation of the text line by line: and let it be placed on the abscess with wool, to keep the bow in place, and do not remove the large bandage except after many days once;
and those who are over the abscess in the chest, often remove to remove the bow, and knows what runs from the bow, if it is poison or pock or enough, or digest, or indigest;
and check if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when this medicine has spread out in a certain way and you see the nature that rises from the navel to the breast, if you know that the breasts are already developing, and bring the saint near;
and then put it in the morning, or in the third day, and when you clean the wound, if they change.i. another fabric, and renew the bandage.
And if the breasts become hard after many days, knowing that the breasts do not hurt. And if subtle venom comes slowly after a long time, if it does not dispel you from health,
For health approaches gradually. For there are men whose pain in their wounds increases and who cause the opposite to happen;
and if it is indignant, it jumps out of the sea after many days, knowing that the sea does not move.
and if his breast is tardy to heal, and is enlarged, then put medicine between moist in substance and dry in virtue. so that it may be cured completely, for there is a great deal of vitriol, and this is the back medicine;
take the end of vitriol, and make it with oil of rose, and dilute it with equal substance of red wine;
then add honey to it and increase its size. when the ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it comes out of the fire; and then apply it to the wound, and never use it as a drink or as an ingredient in a meal, and roots of the herb called garlic, which is also like flour of beans and centory.
and roots of the herb called garlic, which is also like flour of beans and centory. and in the use of simple herbs or compounds: grind them, and make a powder thereof, and put thereon the honey which I have said, and use it. and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then you know that corruption is complete, and it affects the bones or hard members, or the limbs. If the healer of the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the toenail
is a toenail that grows out from the base of the nail on the palm of the hand, or in other cases it may come out from under another nail;
and when it is sent, and no care is taken, so that there comes .i. abscesses, and cut and get down as far as they can cut the root of the nail, and by chance cut it all.
and the corrosion comes up to the bone, so that there is a pungent pain, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color is blue.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess that has been preserved from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy;
and if the nail starts to curl, and blisters, If you need to put the ring on the nail that points down, and the bottle upside down, and gently and lightly wrap this thin skin. and put on the remains of the skin medicinals burning and corrosive in order to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it chips off, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see that the corruption has spread, chip it off as described above, then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is broken, and hurts, and smells bad, then you must heal it first. Then cut the nail of the little finger with a chisel from the side,
and be careful that the cutting does not go to the knuckle, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if that happens, put something on it that soothes.
The two of you must stretch out those who are born with a large amount of flesh. and by chance there is bone there, and never an ankle.
and none of the two are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in neither of us two. Those who are born in neither of the two don't move. And those who are born with a double joint, by chance do not move.
the size of that which is chubby so is light, in some way: the size of that which is chubby so is light, in some way:
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief à curer: si te tien dou coper.
In the one who is born or must to the tail not, if it seems necessary that you chop first the meat roundly up to the bone, and then chop the bone with a suitable saw for this, and then heal as long as it is healthy.
The two ways in which it comes together by nature, by joining of wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you chop this joint together, if it is joined according to its natural form; Then place between two tents or drapes dipped in oil so it doesn't stick. or you place between two thin pieces of cloth until the joins are stuck together as is right.
The two pieces should be pressed together with the palm of one hand so that it sticks properly as is right.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Veins are large wrapped full of melancholy superfluities, which come from many members of the body.
And more comes in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is therefore necessary that you give no spurious purging of the colon, and then heal the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to these two ways: one is to drink it mixed, and the other is to run black blood. and the other way is that you hold the vein, and tie it all up tightly.
The size should be according to this method: raise the first leg of the patient very strong with hot water, until the large vein is clearly visible. Then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the ankle; Then cut the vein in one place, or in two places, or in three places, of a width that is wide;
and then take out with force the black blood from your hand, from one side to the other, as much as the virtue of the disease allows you to suffer;
and then burn it, and command that he turns his meat black with coal;
and then restart the evacuation and sweating when the veins are clean, and give the medicine to the patient.
The method of applying the remedy is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is hair, Then put it in a bath, and raise his leg with hot water until it turns red, and swollen veins.
and if you don't have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then put it on the affected area from the ankle to the knee, or in the part below the ankle at the foot;
then soak the skin with vinegar, and scrape the vein from each side until it feels smooth when touched;
and if it turns red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems as white as a rope;
and bottle up the roast as long as it is lean meat, and then dip it in a light wine,
then cover with another 1/4 of an ounce; then peel the skin from the vein as long as it appears, then dip in roast at an angle as you did, and dip in another ounce, as you did first time;
then cover with another size, or more if you need it, then peel the meat, and cover with two ounces of wine on the foot,
and then cut the tail and leave it at the second size; then take it out size by size until it is all finished, then cover it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then tie a strong double thread of thread to it. and leave it and cut it, and twist it with the thumb, and turn your hand from side to side, until it is all finished; and keep it from unraveling, for if it unravels, then you cannot draw it out or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have finished treating it, put a wet wool cloth, soaked in wine and oil, on the wound's place; and let the cure go on until it is healed.
And if the vision is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you split it badly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have described before.
if you split it badly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have described before. The form of iron that you cover the vision with if it is curved, and do not cut it, so that it covers the vein;
and is of large circumference, because if it were thin, it would split the vein, but being thick as we said, and this is the form:
From the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture.
and perhaps it grows in other parts besides the legs, and this causes a peeling that comes from the skin,
If he comes from within the body snake-like and downward, protect between skin and leather.
And if the signs of this injury are that it comes in the leg a very great swelling, then change their faces, and begins the injury to come out, also like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, if you wrap a piece of linen around one third and a half up to two thirds, and tie it on,
and leave the ball hanging at the leg, and every time that it is there to the side, if the wrapper wraps around the ball and the new; and if it is too far away, so that a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it all the way up to its root, as long as it is all out; because if you cover it, so that it enters into the charnel, and brings about abscession and rot where it is, and bad sickness;
because for this thing it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and there remains nothing or bones;
and this vein is never done when it comes to .v. palms long, or .x., and here are some fine people who have come to me, of whom she is of .x. long palms, and when you chop them, if they are short or large, and pierce until it is deep,
so that everything is removed; and let the matter which is within be empty, and introduce into it remedies for any kind of corruption each day, then heal it as you would an abscess.
And never do this vein with hands wet, and certainly not when she opens at the joint of the foot, or where the foot is. and the wind comes from the east, and from which it rains; treat it then as we have said above.
Worms that are born between skin and cloth
This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease", because it often affects buffaloes,
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and cloth, and it goes everywhere, ascending and descending, and the pain is very great from one limb to another, until it tears the skin where it goes, and makes a loud sound.
and is infected with pus, as if it comes from within, winding itself in and out, and sending forth worms and scabies or parasites.
and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the neck: and in due course enters and destroys the throat; and this happens many times.
When you cure and extract it, if it can only be done when he is:
So that you can put the joint in place again with a strong rope, tightly wound,
and then turn it over and over, and if it does not fit perfectly into the frame, so that the fire cautery on it as long as it dies;
and the greatest harm he causes, if he ruins oil, as we have said;
and if you see him coming with his head near the oil, then remove his eye completely, then cut it off and throw it away;
and use the patient of purification of water of medicine solutions for bad humors to come out;
and if meat is rotten.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vacir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members. and it spreads from one member to another; and I saw the one I told you about.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and .i. shortly thereafter, the eye rises up like a snake to the shoulder, as soon as possible, also as if it were alive silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place and enters into the shoulder,
and then a little later it runs through all the body, until it came out in the other arm;
And he told me that it twists around the body, as I saw it.
I marveled how much it moved from limb to limb, for I have never seen this disease move like that before. Nevertheless, I know of many who have had pain in one place and then in another. but I have never seen it happen like that, as I saw it happen to the woman.
and I thought it was for this reason that the woman had a dry breast, and the veins uncovered. and for this reason does she seem to be constipated?
and do not appear to be constipated according to this reasoning, but these who are delicious, and have dry breasts and veins.
And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels pain as we have described, If the lion lies down and does not get up again, and then it copes with him as long as that wind forces him to lie down. and cauterize the lion; and if you do not see his eyes,
For the cure of this person who causes wind, as if they were pills of putrid meat, and pills of seraphim, and similar things.
arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and others small, and some curved, and some soldered. and some with .ij. angles, and some with tongues, and some where there are pieces. and some that strike in any member so strike according to .ij. ways: or in a principal member chews,
Here is the translation of the first sentence in your text: When there is a loss of sensation in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, then you know: If you wash yourself with water from a spring, for death comes after many preparations; and when there is no sign of death, and the arrow has not been completely extracted, if you tie it and clean the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, is when scotomy and pain and stiffness and redness in the joints, and inflammation and redness in the tongue, and spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and sometimes it comes from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice; and sometimes there is a wet white spot on the wound, resembling pus, and sometimes it looks like burnt flesh;
and if this sign appears, if you hold it for a cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in place.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or curls is that it is near the left breast and also feels like it is wedged into something hard, not hollow. and if the arrow changes as well as a bird, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and faints: says ahead of time that death might come.
And the sign of an arrow is that it does not feel pain in the palm, but when it jumps out of the wound there is foam, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily and shudders with cold.
And if the arrow enters into the shoulder blade's cover, it severs the little ribs; and causes great pain and sorrow and heavy breathing; and all the limbs shake.
And if the arrow enters into the stomach, perhaps there is foam jumping out of the wound, indicating that it has gone astray and not struck the target.
And if the arrow enters into the abdomen, and in jumping out of the wound there is no end to the intestines, then there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and the urine flows out in spurts and he runs away, and the patient feels great pain, you know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, as it is the case with the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forelegs and legs, and similar body parts, are safe according to several arrangements. When the arrow enters the neck or artery, and it is not fatal, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you do something else.
He had an arrow choked or cut in the root of the neck: I tried it, and the other side sewed up the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling any pain.
And I sewed up a piece of meat that had gotten into the fat of the oil, separating the paper from it. and the arrow was withdrawn, and I could only get to the tip towards the wood. and the arrow was blue-green in color, very light in weight without ears; the game was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.
And cut an arrow from the throat of a Christian man, and the arrow was Arabic to the ears.
I knew the armpits, and I tested it until I cut it, and the Christian man was cured.
And cut an arrow at the hip, which went through his belly or chest, and I thought he would die;
and then he lived for three hundred years, but his condition did not improve; I cut the arrow, and set it in place, and drew it back, and there was no bad accident.
And if you want to see a man who has an arrow shot through his buttocks or anus, and the wound is well healed over;
and let the arrow remain inside, and do not change its natural state; do not find harm in any of its natural works.
And I see another man, to whom he shot an arrow into his face, and it was sewed up;
and it remained thus without suffering much pain; and many others.
And shot an arrow at a prince's son, the king, which went through his neck, but missed his heart. and it was slightly倾斜着向右边；而且箭头完全扎进去了。
I was called to treat after she had been ill for two days. The wound was very narrow.
I asked her to open her mouth wide, and I did not feel anything; and she felt pain and discomfort on the right side of her ear. I thought it was from the point of an arrow
I put on the plaster of troy to the chest for this reason so that the lungs do not swell. and I discovered the lungs from the arrow.
and I discovered the lungs from the arrow. I put on the plaster every day, and quickly resolve the wound, and delay it for a long time for the patient,
until he feels the arrow; and I tell him. I put on the wound a caustic medicine by hands, as long as it was open.
and I tried, and felt the head of the arrow which moved to its place; then I put on the wound by that caustic medicine, as long as the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
and I traversed well the terms for three months,
and then unwrapped it with a wound I had tied up with thorns, and the flesh on either side, and it couldn't be pulled out.
then I stopped using sharp tools and devising methods to remove it until I got a good pair of pliers. according to what its shape will be after the end of this chapter, as long as I kept it in my hand and returned the wound to its place.
And the judge said that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored: I healed it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Tell me about the quality of extracting certain arrows, if you apply my remedy to those I do not mention here, for the book cannot include everything;
But the master sages compare only a few things, and those that are present and failing; trueve nueve oevre, et nuef instrument, au dessendement des choses extrangies qui avienent en cet art.
I say that the arrows should not come from the members where they are inserted except according to the following four ways. or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which goes in by one way, when it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and does not go in again at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as the fur is rotten inside, and let the issue come out.
And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if you leave it like this for some days, and move it every day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if there is a small hole inside everywhere, as long as the inside space is widened, and then the treatment is applied;
And if the arrow is re-embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, and you seek it throughout the whole body; and if you can feel it, and with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the pressure of the wound, and for the sake of the arrow's depth; and there is no bone or nerve or vein, if the wound is large; and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, if the shaft is lodged in the muscle at a depth of .ij. parts from the tip that you can feel, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it; and carefully though you do not break the arrow, that you draw it out more painfully.
And if you cannot take it out at once, so that the end of the arrow is stuck in his flesh, then draw it out, for extraction is painful. And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, then apply what we have said about the cure in our chapter on the paste;
and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and do not attempt to draw out the arrow without risk;
Ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, If it is hot or cold, or firmly or painfully; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow went in,
For an arrow that comes from another part, or does not open anything of it, or the skin is swollen in a particular place, if we see it or feel it:
Therefore cut along, as long as the scrapes can take it, and then remove it: but now jump back.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
And if it cannot be removed, let it rest, and then begin the extraction again as long as it can be;
and if there is a arrow in it, blow it out completely;
and if there is a knot, and you know how to cut it, so you administer the instrument well; So that the arrowhead goes into the hole of the instrument; and then pour out,
and if the arrow is cut, so that the instrument with a point entering it, for to rejoice the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, so that you cut all the charm around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it covers, if it is possible.
And if the arrow pierces where the pelvis or bladder or ribcage is, and it is close by, then you can cover over it, if you cover.
and don't cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, that is a job. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an eye, and this is how you should do it:
And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common heart Of the veins from which one heals are xxxiii, so that there is a head xvi.
This is to know: i.i. bones that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbeche". and the ii.i. arteries that are in ii.i. temples apparent; and .ij. veins that are in .ij. nails of .ij. hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head; and the 2. veins that are at the neck; and the 2. veins that are on top of the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augerich"; and there are veins that are torn.
The veins that are commonly known as  are found in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it runs along the left side of the body, and it is called by the common people "vein of the head"; and the other is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of comfort"; and if the base is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the navel", and it is over the heart. and that is which is opened in front of the navel.
And the small vein is the one that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three rains.
and in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is desoz the corbeure doupochet de senestre costit and the second one, which is at the ankle of the right coast; and the vein that is called «nesse», which is in the ankle of the other coast;
and in the other leg are .iij. veins desoz those.
and the vein that is called  «sainie», which is behind the ears, and it has a headache and migrain. and the qualities of the patient, as I told you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the patient, as I told you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a sharp cloth; then tie up the patient's neck with a strap, until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears in .iij. places depending on the head: then feel for the pulse on both sides, and where you feel the pulse pulsating on one side, sign;
and take the lance, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein upstream, and cut off and tie up the flesh and the vein well .ij. two must travel, and let out blood as much as you see;
then extract and bind it together, as long as it is healthy;
and I have already mentioned incision and cauterization in the first book.
The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause migraine headaches, and eye pain, and a sore throat, and water coming from the eyes;
and the quality of the vessel if it is like this: is that the patient's neck is stretched out so that the two veins open up widely. and send the hair above the nose to grow long, and then sign with the hand.
then place the curette on the vein at the top of your index finger, and dip the lance into water, and place the vein at the top, and cut it, like you did in .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then remove the curette, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then let it form, and leave it until it is healthy; and we have spoken of them and their cutting and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The health of the front vein is as good as the health of the cerebral veins from the ancient diseases of the face, and has headaches and dizziness;
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
And place the tip on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand, or some other object, and let the blood flow in the amount that you see. Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break if it is too thin.
The five veins that are in the five limbs should be tied together, and at the base of the neck, and to the taste, and to the redness, and to the oil, and to the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is that the patient pulls his neck out by twisting it from any rope, as before;
and then the health, and be the health of the traveler, a little of the long flame a little wide, because there is no fire.
And if the flames are subtle, in case of a breeze; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it to the cotton, and tie it well.
The health of the vein of the new born baby should be measured, and if it is too big or too small, and if there are any diseases on the face, if as headache and brightness that comes to the face, and even when it is old;
and the quality of the disease is that the patient twists his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a long thin flame, and burn between the iij. nostrils, for the vein does not open well on its own, and now the blood will begin to flow;
and do not overheat it too much, and make it run a bit of blood according to your need, then leave it a night, for it is quickly restored;
The five givens in the form of fire: aid in the stranglehold of the larynx, and in the obstruction of speech, and many diseases, and impetigo, and ulcers, and herpes, and are to be used.
and the quality of the fire so that the disease is removed from the neck on both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient cuts with .i. a scythe,
then he heals the vein of the long one widely then soon of blood, or as much as is necessary;
then he repairs the other in the same way, then he draws out the ligaments carefully, and holds them so that they do not move; let the patient rest; and in the morning the wound is healed.
On the health of deer On the health of lips: to prevent chaps from forming on the corners of the mouth, and from corroding the gums, and from splits in the lips, and from nosebleeds and headaches.
And the qualities of this remedy are to make the patient sit in front of you, and to hold his throat as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the two openings, which are on the right and left lips. and the eyes look like they are black, and because of the small veins around them that are black: so cope both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
so cope both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cope the largest of each pair, and do the same for the .ij. veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
Of the small ones on top For the blood vessels that are opened with the tongue after opening the cerebral vein, and this is in the extraction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the surgeon is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the tongue turns blue, and looks down at each side a black vein.
So then both sides, and do not over-surge, for the veins are there.
The veins of the neck which are commonly operated on are operated on according to .ij. manners:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and the stretching of veins. The shape of the flame is like this, and it is wide as you see it:
And has the skill to open the flat veins that are visible with great blood flow, and that contain large blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle pointed, and it is for saving subtle veins, or there is subtle blood yellow.
The salve of the basilica, which is one of these veins, soothes diseases that are found in the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
and it is necessary for the healer to heal thoroughly, and to warm himself with the artery that is found. And if he cuts into the artery, and blood flow comes, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said; and should not be held by fire but cut off as much as possible.
And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to remove it and change it with another one; or you do not want any rain of his, or you heal in the place of his the vein by cutting off the arm: it opens clearly; and the coat to the flame ansile, as we have said.
and if you know the place of the injury, so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as soon as you know the hair; then mark the place of the head, and then draw the arm, and coat the vein with the flame ansile;
and guard against injuring in the artery when you see the head dislocated, for it is from the artery: beware of it. So as not to.
And if you see coming out on top as urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: So hurry up, and place your hand on top for a long time, then remove your hand so that it does not hurt, because this often happens;
So raise the limb up and leave it there, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
And if the limb is not stable, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not given to you, then open the artery, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; and stop the bleeding.
And take a strip of fig bark, cut it, and take one half and tie it firmly together up to the other day.
If there is no bleeding, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops bleeding; as we have said,
and the bleeding does not become greater in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The treatment for a vein in the middle is to place the finger with the wound at the base of the neck, and around the heart. for it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it comes to the surgeon that he should cut down on the nerve which is exposed, and if he cuts too much in perfection, and then it bleeds; and it swells up and the patient becomes gray, and perhaps cannot heal;
and the nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you must cut it with an anesthetic; and avoid cutting the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two thirds, then make it long.
The treatment of a headache with the help of fire, that it pulls away from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is appropriate to hit with fire from the olive or from the merlin flame, because it is the most effective for all veins, since it does not damage the nerves or arteries.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest fire first, and do no harm the first time, and start over again; and in case it increases the length of some men's penises for the first time but does not harm them. The quality of health depends on your belief.
The first thing you should know about a doctor is that medicine should only be practiced to maintain health.
and to prevent diseases from arising; and let the surgeon make it in one of the three veins that are in the head: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basal. and the surgeon must make it at the beginning of fasting, and in autumn and winter after supper when the sign of fullness appears.
and the surgeon must make it on the first day or the third day, after two hours or three days a day.
The surgeon who is amined for certain diseases has no fixed term, but it must be done at the beginning of the day or night in all hours and times;
and one should not save children until they are 12 years old, nor a woman unless she has been pregnant for four months until the seventh month. One should not save the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
And if one is to be saved in any way, it is necessary that the intestines of a light clister be destroyed. if it has suffered from a foul wind, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous dung that is harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;
car il y a plusors mores qui sont souvens, comme la colique et le vomissement, et le decorrement de ventre, et la multiplicatie d’abiter a femme, et le traval, et veiller et juner;
and to keep the flesh of the foot dry from the wound at the third toe, as we have said;
and to protect yourself from work, hunger, lust, and similar things;
and be lying down and jointed, and may the surgeon be above you, and rub your arms. 12 times or 13,
then remove the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or constricted, it cannot run without being removed.
and then rub the wound with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them.
then soak the wound with a little old oil, then put your index of your left hand on that wound to rub it where you want to heal, to make sure that the vein is not cut and does not bleed. For there are veins that run like strings to the skin, and if any such are damaged, they will bleed profusely. if one puts out the flame, then removes it, and cannot open the vein, then is he among those;
and if one opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, so that he may be warned of the need for care in such things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again a little later on that same side or during treatment, if the legs are swollen.
And if the legs are swollen, and the patient hopes to recover, let him lie for a day or two, and do not bind his arm. For adventure I will come out of the chest; no bath, then start the cure if it pleases her.
and if the break is small, or the blood runs subtlely and you doubt that it will not run as much as you see, so confident in this very break, right up to the full flame;
and work a little hospital, so that her legs are swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the leg swollen, do not restart the cure, and put a little oil thereon, for it softens the body of the blood, and is fresh in this leg where the oil is placed, because she smoothes the course of the blood, and is moistened by this oil.
and administer oil to each vein you cut, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same mixture makes three times as strong and hard when placed on top; but if it is too thick, it disperses so easily.
And if there is one large abscess, which often occurs when the opening of the vein is small, then if you hurry, and place a wet sponge in water and salt on top, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on nothing of aloe or myrrh in the juice of calamus, vinegar, or resembling.
And often there is an abscess and a bad appearance in the place of the bazooka: put your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the appearance of the bad. So avoid putting on anything of what we have said, because perhaps in the court without the artery; but make it.I. dry by applying plaster to harden the place, then heal it with other remedies until it is healthy.
And each of the three must be used according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it run until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it run until it is thin; and if it is too thick, let it cool.
And for those who are pale and have a need to extract blood, one should make the wound larger and wider, and make the flames wide.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is good to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them across rather than straight; not by piercing.
and this method of treatment saves from decay of the flesh and destruction of the nerves, and it is better than long or wide surgery.
And for those whose bodies require surgery, it is good to give water in grape juice; if it is heated, it will cool the body three or four times or seven or eight times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, if he moistens before the surgery with water in muslined juice, or in honey syrup infused with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
And if he sweats during the surgery, after the exit of the blood from the vein, it is good that he inhales broth and subtle fragrant syrup.
and employ other things that we have spoken of in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
If it vomits up arms, and sometimes also, if it is weak enough, that it heals little by little, according to the quantity of its continuing virtue.
And if it vomits up arms after the first healing, and has a strong pulse, then heal it after .viij. hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And if it heals on another part, it must heal three times a day.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it brings on a fever. If this quantity is drawn in great amount, and the opening enlarged until it comes out in small drops; And that you keep all of the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse as it heals, so that death does not come out in small drops; And if this often happens when the healing is neglected;
and do not come until you see the arm move again, and make a second incision, and close the opening, that you press firmly upon it; If he is hoarse, let him stretch his arms weitly, for it would be ill.
but let him rest until he is well the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen at the edge of the vein thaws out. and put on .i. piece of silk wet with water, and press lightly.
And if the vein has been pricked, do not hold it, but let it rest until the abscess has subsided.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then the vein in the middle, or another vein, or in the other arm.
The arm is veined where it connects to the shoulder; therefore, draw blood from there if it is composed of veins.
And the way to prepare the vein is that the patient dips his hand in warm water until the pulse becomes faint;
Then stretch the skin gently so that the vein appears clearly; then cut it now, not wide nor long;
and let the split be wide, and let the wound be well near the joint of the hand, and so it cannot come out, put the hand in warm water, and let the blood run into the water as long as you have enough of it;
and if it is heated up, then do not re-boot the hand in warm water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the wound from this vein is safer from all other wounds, that there is no artery or nerve;
the saving of the right hand wound from all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Here is the translation of the first line of the text: and if you cross-slice it all, do not hurt anything."
and do not cut too deeply, lest the nerve be damaged, for they are all naked under the skin."
and then put the hand back in hot water, which freezes it into the wound, and cannot be taken out."
And when you have treated blood as much as is necessary, if you put oil and thread so that the vein is tightly bound together, and do this for each limb.
The blood of him in the left hand belongs to the disease of the mouse, and do all the same as I told you about the right.
The blood of the woman belongs to all the diseases that are caused by the horse, such as diseases of the mare, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rain, and of the cocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient drinks some hot water, and rubs the vein as long as it hurts. and on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and up to the foot in many places;
So that it goes deeper or wider, or at the ankle, so that it must be cut more deeply.
And if you cut it on the foot, so that the wound is deep and wide, and cut it as one would in a field; and let the flames burn.
And if he cannot come out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if it bleeds too much the first time, start the second time a little higher up because the blood is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, if it bleeds too much, as we have said, and so do the same thing with the other foot evenly.
The blood of the vein is at the ankle, and its sap is worth the pain of the thigh, when it comes to pain.
And the quality of his leg is that the patient goes or bathes, and removes from above the ankle .iiij. two in twisting,
For otherwise does not open the vein; and if it opens, so that you can heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is worth more than you can cut it, for the leech is above, and it is very repleted with moisture to many men.
and it is worth more than you can cut it, for the leech is above, and it is very repleted with moisture to many men. And if you do not heal it, so that the leech is above or below the foot, and toward the small ear, and guard against the water;
and do so much blood that you see, and then untie the link, and put on cotton and hold it in place; now he is healed.
Vacuums of suction
are made of horns, or glass, or marble; and the suction is applied according to 3.1 ways: either by hurting and pulling out blood, or without hurting.
And this type of suction that is without hurting is according to 3.1 ways: either it is all fire, or it is not fire;
and 1 other on 1 coast of the neck; and the windpipe separates the mouth; and the windpipe separates the shoulders; and the windpipe under the chin; and the suction cups extract the .ij. arms; and the suction cups of the .ij. legs; and the suction cups of the .ij. ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except that of small veins that are scattered over the cart,
and for this reason do not feel faint, as one feels when opening a vein; and it does not need to be eaten, nor does it need to be drunk, in any disease that comes from overindulgence, until the whole body is empty.
And if because of necessity due to disease or by custom, we administer it every hour during the month, or at its end and in between;
for there are some who, when they need to vomit, become very ill;
and if there are those who have vomiting and redness on their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and if there are those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and they are parched with thirst; and if there are some who think and see blood and vomit and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and indeed when it is half past noon, we order them to exhale after.iij. hours of the day.
The physician of the mother should not help in the birth of the child ... that comes to the hairs, and it is not until after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventilation is in place for the physician of the head,
and it is not good for those who are of cold complexions to use it or who have had a fever, because this does them much harm.
and so it is not good for those who are old to use it, or who have had any cold diseases.
And those who are cured of it often become confused, and therefore the cautery should be placed a little further back due to the confusion.
The placement of the cautery at the base of the neck is good for diseases of the throat and tonsils, and also for treatment of the mouth. and from the splitting of the channel of the pommel, and all the rest, and repletion;
and it is necessary to put it in with force, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be difficulty or obstruction or stomach or elsewhere.
The ventsations are like .ij. ribs of the neck if it hurts as much as the pain in the head, and blinding and throbbing, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth,
and is in the place of the health of the church; and it is necessary that you command to the saint that he express his hand to put on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not bring damage from blood.
The windings of the mouth are very much affected by disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and other diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place where the lower lip meets the upper.
The windings of the shoulders are affected by disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The windings of the sides affect as much as the three veins of the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins.
and command to the surgeon that he does not cut too much perfectly, for his veins are naked of flesh and know how to stop bleeding.
and the suction cup that is on the back so vale as emoroydes from the foundation, and of disease suet, and it should be a great one, and be of leather, that has a good business of well sucking; and by chance, if it were subtle, then would it break; and make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs so open, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for ancient pains of the hips, and of the knee, and of the bladder, and remove the flowers; and they are in the place of the two feet, and moreover they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about death in many dispositions.
The method of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it firmly, and stir evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and appear the pain of blood; then stop, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have a dark color, and clear pores: so it is necessary to cut once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if he is out of breath, then he should strike 19 times: the first time to make a path for heavy blood.
And if he is very heavy, then he should strike the third time; and when we want to squeeze out blood little by little, we should only press once.
And if we want to squeeze out blood, we should do so frequently; and if he is heavy, we should strike firmly, and the blow should be such that the heart is pierced suddenly.
and cover those with thick and tough skin, who have been pricked by needles, that you rub the joints with oil that softens and dissolves. Here is the translation of the first sentence of the text in Old French into English:
if it is in the liver, of oil of sorrel, or of larkspur, or of chamomile, or other similar matter.
and if the surplus is thick and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balsam, or of aniseed, and similar matters.
and if the meat is tender and large porridge, then it is not necessary to put oil in it:
but it is necessary to wash after the windification of pink water, or cold water, or sloe water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other resembling.
And he who has moisture, if it is lifted thus, or with pink water, and with water of myrtle, and with sumac, and with resembling things.
And he who has great excesses, are lifted by old wine, or with water of hawthorn, or with a decotion of fennel or chamomile, or other resembling things.
and it is not necessary to take a bath before the windification, but after the bath an hour or so; and do not sleep after windification.
and he must not go to bed, when he should be winded, nor when he is winded. And guard against those who are ill-tempered, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed; if he drinks cold things, as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce at the mint, and similar things;
and warm wine, and ale of wheat, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, if they drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and they juice little, and juice little and small birds and pigeons.
and the day when he will be wind-blown, if he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some people three times or more of an aromatic or musk before or after the wind, in order to comfort the main members; and let it be subtle, but it is necessary that only those who are warm drink it.
The suction cups that are not meant to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and on the podagra, and on the belly, and on the boudin, and on the reins, and on the hainche, for this member does not suffer pain from being cupped.
and one does it not more than to attract blood from member to member, if we put on the mammary glands when the child is stillborn; to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, if we put suction cups on the belly and on the boudin to reduce the member;
and it relieves pain, when there is an operation or death, if by its attractive virtue the operation is relieved, or it moves away the stone from its place;
and so he will do if he puts it on the liver and on the heart when there is wind trapped,
and these suction cups are emptied clean so that only a little; and never are they emptied together fire, and never are they emptied with sweet water.
as the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that he fills the suction cup with hot water or with water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
And there are 21/4 inches of leather from the edge around the middle. A small hole as for an awl
and be of skin, smooth before it so that it does not cut the patient when put on the member;
and in the middle is a staff of skin or iron to hold a candlestick,
and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
For the children's suction cups are different from the old ones, and leaner than the fat ones.
And one must put this suction cup onto the limb:
take the candle of wax or .i. smoothly, and put it on the suction cup at the root of the penis which is on the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so it doesn't burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and your two hands are on the joint that we have said, so that when you see him, if there is steam, and take off the suction cup;
and take the dressing off as before, and put it back on often, if you need to.
In the case of the suction cup which is amine for pleurisy, there is no verge or hole, and it is only used when it is flat with water, and put on the limb as little as possible;
and this is the form:
Sansues are not applied except to limbs where it is impossible to use suction cups due to their smallness, as with lips and gums, and similar things. and in the naked legs of a horse, as with two or three year olds, and others similar;
and the quality of using them so that when you find Sansues that are in clear fresh water, take them;
and put them into a bowl of clear fresh water, as long as they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then wash with water and vinegar, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are clear, and are healing, then if it is possible to put a suction cup, then put it on, because that helps after.
If not, then raise the limb, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if the limb is too warm after washing the skin, then wrap it in a cold linen cloth, and put on, until the skin is dry;
and if it has a multiplicity of holes, then put on it crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar things until it is stopped.
or you put half of peeled peas on the place, and leave them as they cook in the place, then now it will be stopped;
and if you have more work to do, then take other waters.
And if the waters do not want to take it, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you put an needle in it as long as the water comes out. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, if they burn.
When you see that they are crying, sprinkle a little powder of allium and marjoram, or ash, so they will not cry now.
This is the beginning of the book of fractures
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
You must know, my son, that the wise men of old did not write of this medicine, nor have I ever read of it in any book.
and for this reason the knowledge of this medicine is strange to us in our country, for I never found any good knowledge of it;
and I know nothing about it except from the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied and treated the science, and by experience, and by the customs of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and summarized it at the end, and clearly illustrated the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the preceding twenty chapters.
It is fitting that we say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and it remains on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist or sprain comes to someone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing else stops him, so as not to be weak of heart, or feeble, or old;
or if it is too tight or too loose; and if it is a cold weather, a cart drawn by oxen and covered with hides, and do not drink wine, nor eat any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the aphorism, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the disease returns to its first rule, which it has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that promote fatness, or they have viscosity, such as cooked flour in water, and rice, and beans, and peas, and poultry, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For if a person is too cold, it is better to prevent injury and do so more quickly.
And know that the bones broken from age and decay cannot be well healed or strengthened according to their nature by the loss of members, nor those which are too tender, as the bones of small children;
but there is no cure, repair the broken bone. I. large tendons which join and support the limb together, as much as possible so that it heals properly; and for this purpose there should be a lot of meat, as we have said.
And know that broken bones are of many kinds and in various ways.
For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the hip, and another when it is sharpened, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the hip, and another when it is sharpened, as the cutting of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a little cut.
And to each kind there is its own tool, and its own instrument for restoration, according as the memory comes back to its place.
and is caused by the breaking of the bone because the joints are twisted and open well from the sides, and press on with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or bumping, and the patient feels no great pain, it is not due to any fracture;
but it may well be due to twist, or a crack, or a small fracture. If it is not due to any twisting with the hand, but rather put medicines on it that come later, and then gently hold it now.
And know that the break that is in the shoulder, and these 3 parts are separated, now it is necessary to put them together evenly, so that the abscesses come out easily.
and if the abscesses have come out, then he should not rest for a day, until the abscesses are healed. then he should make it even with the knife that you can cut and trim lightly and carefully, and know that the healing of this is lighter than the healing of that which has pieces; then he binds it, as it is fitting hereafter.
and if there is a bone with pieces broken, and if it is the hand or foot or any small member of the body, or two strings, or a string and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are in place, by all means return them to their places with your tools, and be careful that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the .ij. bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: if it is stretched well and does not move too much, do not press it so much as those who work on it with fire and contraction of the member do, as we have often wanted.
And when the member is in place, so strictly keep the patient that he does not move it, neither awake nor sleep, nor turn, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when one feels no pain at all, almost not at all, and it is necessary to put in place the arrangement that one feels no pain;
For when one feels no pain at all, almost not at all, and it is necessary to put in place the arrangement that one feels no pain; and guard well that it is put correctly, so that there is no twisting when it is restored;
and the quality of the limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that there are various kinds of broken limbs, small and large and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs, and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft linen cloths.
and for those who are fat, such as the chest and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and sturdy linen cloth, because the large linen envelops the entire limb, holding it firmly together so that there is no gap;
and then tie them lightly in three or four turns around the limb, and hold one hand over all the linen, then go up to the break and tighten it less, so that the break is slightly pulled away from the hand; car il est bon que li membre ne soit pas trop estraint sous peine qu’il en soit dommageable;
and soften the joint little by little, until you press hard on the sound part of the joint, then take another joint, and turn it back quickly on the broken one;
then return to the sound part of the fracture and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first joint above;
then place between the joints of linen or drapelets, until they are all even, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that soothes the swelling and leaves it alone for several days.
Then tie them to your poles, and be of half a long line made red, or of a mast that is used for sailing, or of palms, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the pole that one puts on the break is a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be also far away as necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness;
then tie them to the poles also as you did with the first pole, then bind above a thread equally, as in the first pole on the break;
and the thread gets tighter, then looser again; and it is necessary that the string be neither too thin nor too thick, and that it be soft.
for if the string is thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their cords out of twisted linen threads, and that is a great mistake, because the thread cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only comes to between each stone less than two inches of space.
And if the patient is wounded by the nails in his bones after the extraction in his health, so do not put them together with linen, or woolen cloth, so that he does not bleed.
When the wound is with the bruise, and the wound is broken, I will tell the cure here after.
And know that it is not good to extract all the members of the body on the first day. For when the members are large, it is not good to put on braces before 5 or 10 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess, and in a few days it will have healed.
and this is the method of the ancient braces for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour which holds to the walls of the mill, and confound it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common method of the brace restoring the fracture to many conditions, and most of all to women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of the brace restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take Z barars and lanolin and knotgrass and asfetida and gum arabic and myrrh, Z.Z.Z.; mirr and aloe, Z.v.Z.; alychil Z.viiij.Z.; and make a powder of them, and mix it with plenty of egg; this composition of the meat is hot, so use this brace, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones gently, and is worth to many men.
Another way of plasters that is worth: take mugwort and chamomile, 1/10th Z. mirrra and aloe, 1/7th Z.; acacia vi. Z., well ground, and confit with oil or lots of honey, and administer it.
Another way of plasters that is effective for dislocated joints and broken bones: take a young lamb, and moil it in water and oil, and put it on the joint. These plasters do not help, but they are good to soothe hot abscesses and properly treat pain in the bone.
Another way of making plasters to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way of making plasters to heal broken bones and reduce inflammation: take roots of chamomile, violettes, times, and wheat; grind them together with a little wine, and apply it to the member that is warm. Alternatively, grind the roots with oil, and apply it to the joint with a little honey or oil of coriander.
Another way to make plasters more strongly than the first, when the wound of the member comes to restoration. Take roots of plantain, and seeds of flax, buckthorn, melilote, and sycamore-bark, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; and grind them up, and confect with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras states that one should not put plaster on a broken member more strongly than the wax and oil cerots, and nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken member things dry and warm, such as mirr, aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to make plasters for an injury and pain: take mugathon and horses' hooves, or feathers of ospreys, and plantain seeds, and wheat, all in equal parts; grind them up, and make plasters with it, and lay it on.
And then pull it a little way apart, and see that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the jaw moved out of its place; if not, pull it by the hands.
And if the pain or itching comes to a head, or there is no relief or swelling, then make haste and pull it apart and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it into the water, and raise up the jaw, until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased; then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or rose oil, and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
and rest the inflammation of the member, and be sure that the pain is gone, then start again with a gentle cautery, and a little plaster, and do not pull it out too strongly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to plaster and bind it, then start again, as you did at first, with even binding.
If it does not come to the member at all, or only after three days or four days, and never more than ten days; according to what you see, as long as the break-up is slow, and the shoulder approaches the socket from below;
then you must restrain it more than before, and make its meat grow thicker, as I have said above; and if you see that the leather dries up more quickly than is necessary, know that the joint is coming together again; then let it rise in warm water every time you release it, and let it rest for three days, and put salt on it;
For this work, therefore, let the member be cut off at its root, and carefully what it has twisted, so that it returns the member to its place: this is bad, and if it is done with fear, and I see no other thing than to allow it to heal and to treat it correctly.
the various ways of breaking There are many ways to break something, and there are different shapes and causes, and they are distinguished.
For there are fractures that are made by the impact of an axe, and the collarbone is broken all the way through until it reaches the shoulder blade, just as it happens with a hatchet; and for this reason it is called "hatchet break".
Or the spear breaks through bone from above and is called in this way "absolute"; and the wound is of these great or small two breaks.
And if there is impact inside, or a blow from above or from the root of a stone, or from sitting on a stone, or similar.
And if there is a piercing break, which comes close to the tendon that is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that enters the bone slightly, as fine as a hair, and this break is called "capillary";
and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and causes a piece of bone to come out, and the head of the bone becomes displaced as the blacksmith does when he works on the bellows; if it enters between the stones.
And this happens more often to those whose bones are moist at the top, so that they become deformed as the head of a child does.
and in all these ways of breaking, small pieces are formed, just like tiles, and I will speak about their treatment in its place.
And let us know all the ways of breaking by traction on them, and inquiry into their causes, and by the horse corrumpe who is above them.
The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed upon. If the fracture is blackened, it will appear so.
In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents that may occur in patients, and if you do not see any bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palmsiness, feverishness, and hairs standing on end, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, they cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see any promising accident, and if you expect healing to begin, then start the treatment.
And when the break comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most so that you can heal.
And if it is in the chest, you must hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not rot, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the tissue that covers the skull, then it is necessary that you split the broken part so: and this is that you squeeze the head of the sick person, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more suavely than you can.
And if the discharge of blood comes up when the bone is uncovered, or an abscess forms, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet cloth soaked in oil. And make the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and are sure of the discharge of blood; then begin to cut the bone, and it is done according to 1.j. ways of work: one way is that you chop at the narrow end before, and this is the form:
And then I pour .I. another amount, as great as the first.
And the second method is that you have several different measurements, some are long and others are wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so that you don't bruise the head.
And if the bone is sharp and hard, so that you pierce it from within, as well as you bring together measurements with filets, not perfectly so that they pass beyond the bone at the back of the head, and must have a margin or a circle on top, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the back of the bone, so that you have filets for all test: and there are the 3 methods of filets:
The quality to pierce within the bone is that you put 1 filet on the bone, and turn back your two hands as much as you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the filet a little further away, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the openings, and do this more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools that you have, such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have the bone pierced and treated, if you know that you retain the sharpness that is delayed from the bone to all .i. other instrument resembling an incisive, but it is necessary that it be more soft and more subtle than the other incisive;
and if it does not delay anything from the small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is slightly damaged by one of the instruments; then heal the wound with a lot of oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another method of opening it is that which Galen mentions, which is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break opened; so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision, from which this form comes:
And don't cut from one side, and are the two sides of the flesh, so that the cutting is next to the bone; then, raise a small mallet above it, so that you gently strike the bone all around, and take great care of the tendon that is attached to the bone.
if it is injured to the bone, so that the bone is slightly broken, because the bone does not hurt easily, and without fear.
And if the bone does not break through to the skin, and the bone is cut slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then smooth it with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to adjust each one according to the injury and the shape of the fracture.
If there are more sharp razors, and then even smaller ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair tresses and subtle cuts, you must bring forth reason according to their treatment; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered to those who have placed their studies in this art.
And if the medicine is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in oil and put it on the wound; then take another doubled cloth, or two, and wet it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do so lightly that you do not injure the medicine, then apply a third one, and do not stretch it out except to the extent that it covers the wound alone;
and leave it for one or two days until the pustules are calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines as roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristolog, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and apply medicines immediately without biting;
and guard that the wound be well-cleansed, so you do not leave it oozing, nor do you let it assemble the bow, for when the bow assembles over the web of the skull, if it is corroded and worn, it brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts on a medicinal sharp thing, if it stops above.
Take care, therefore, that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
And if the blackness comes only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and iii parts of rose oil and bind i drape of it to the medicine. then let the medicine be cured in the way that suits it, until it is well.
Saiches that no time are broken the .ij. parts of the neck above, or the one by the sole, because they are .ij. bones; and that bone is cartilage, and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the 2.ij. parts is broken, it is necessary that you stop your small finger or hurt from the neck, and put it equally in between your index finger and thumb, and towards the outside, until the neck revives according to its natural form; and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the broken part is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the top of a small stick.
And if his fracture is of one-half, if you do otherwise, and hasten to restore the first day if you can.
If not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess at the root has calmed down, then wrap it in linen cloths from the neck down, if his fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another with another from the other side, if his fracture is there; and let the cloths be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
And they say that there is no need to wet the cloths again, each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that the cloth be wet in sheep's fat and powder of millet; then leave the cloth, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And never put feathers in tents, and if you do, so be it. Take off the cover, and let the breeze blow on the patient; or make a knot as you see fit.
And if an abscess breaks out while you are working, so be it. Put cotton soaked in oil or a little bit of salve on it; or, as you see fit.
And if an abscess does not break out, put plaster on it from the outside, made of flour and powder of senna, mixed with alumen, then put it on light bandages, and do not tie the knot;
and if the knot is small and has broken into pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then cut the wound, and cure things that have been broken by it, and bind them together, and if necessary, put plaster on it and oil;
and if he has not within him no wound whatever, if he is cured of fever, and I put hay for him, as long as he is healthy.
from the rupture of the mandible
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the fracture is not very great, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inwards, then you must gently set it back into place.
If the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand into the mouth, gently push the fracture inwards, and with the other hand push it gently to the right. Make it even.
And if there is a fracture of the mandible, it should be treated in .ii. parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth move, or there is a hole, then draw them out with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and put it on the broken jaw, and put 1. drapel double; and put on the drape a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather that is even, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it at the muys you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the appearance has changed, then remove it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply plaster, with powder from the mill, mixed with much egg white or flour of seed, after you have removed the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster applies, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it for as long as it remains healthy; many times is healthy in 3 weeks.
And if the abscesses burst, then treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, it is necessary that no piece of bone is broken; if subtle an ostable instrument is suitable for it.
And if the wound is narrow, then open it with flame according to necessity.
And when you have broken all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, then put on it plasters suitable for him, to prevent infection, until he is healed.
forcele Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.
The broken joints are often forced forward, above the shoulder, and the breakage is according to 1.2 ways: or it is broken and dislocated in 1.2 ways, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound. And the overtaking is when the break is without a wound, that you have 1.2 ministers, so that one tints the shoulder joint that is broken forward; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair.
And if you have the need to extend further, so put on the shoulder an oval piece of cloth, or linen, and let it be large according to your need; and they raise and hold firm the piece, and draw it towards your hand, so that you make even the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder to the far side, because it comes out completely, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his side, and put the shoulder under a pillow, and place the ministers under the shoulder to hold it up; so that the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then apply the break to your two sides, and if you find them broken, cut them with care; and carefully pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, use a tool like that of the incisor to put it back in place.
and make it like a spoon, and is not curly, and be also wide enough according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and have 1.5 inches, as you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, as is the split of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are confident about the incisions, if the wound is hot, and the split is small, or if you doubt about the incisions, if you cover the wound with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot incisions come, if you soak .i. linen in oil and water and wine, and put it on.
Here is the translation of the text line by line: Then take a very broad band of a palm's width, and then put thereon 2 drapails double-folded, and the enplaastre; then take a thin stake of 15 inches long, and wrap it around that band, so that the top of the band hangs down; and put thereon the stake on the break, and turn the band on the neck, and desoz the asselle sainne, and desoz the asselle malaide; and the ramoinne of each one part, and when you see that the lieure holds the break in front, and you clearly see that the stake does not move upon the bone, then reward each day, and when the string slackens, if the restraint;
and make the malaide stand on his back, and let him put when he sleeps .i. small pillow desoz the asselle, to raise the ajutoire up; if the break is lightened by the aligement of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not loose it except in case of a bad accident, for .xx. days;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
of the dislocation of the shoulder
"Then begin the plastering of the shoulder if it has been displaced or is out of place, and only do so by touching it; shape the plaster according to the form of the displacement, and reset it according to its natural position in all ways that you can; then put on top of it powder from the mill with a lot of ash, and apply lightly, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and release the board at the edge of the shoulder, so employ such a cloth as to cover the board evenly; and then hold it firmly in place, so that the board does not move from its position, and check it every day; and whenever it loosens, reset it, and put the board back into its equal position if it has shifted out of place, and lay the patient on their side; and the shoulder is healed in about 20 days or 25, And when these numbers are completed, if it loosens, be sure, for it is not bone that shifts easily."
"And if a piece of the bone has come loose, and not reset, so put on top, and the bone, and do as we said in the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder to calm down an abscess."
Of the break of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this does not happen often; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken in the middle and falls backward, the patient feels great pain, and without support, and always, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the joints in the broken bone, and smells bad.
And the restoration is that the sick person lies down on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together, and join the ribs of the two hands, and carefully make it equal in all ways as much as possible so that the shape of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a cloth, and stick it on the broken bone with plaster, or something light, and wrap it up tightly, and tie it firmly every hour, and if it relaxes, you tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened because corrosion or itching comes to the surface, or pain or swelling comes, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat it in a manner appropriate to the cure; then wrap the plaster on again, and tie it tightly until it is well.
For the break of the ribs
That the breaker of ribs comes only in large ones after the back, and to the head inside, and does not bend too much for those that are shiny; and the sound is good in the inquiry to the two.
And if he restores it so that you make the break even, just as it should be. And then put the plaster on, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do this.
And if the break of ribs is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and aching, as if crying, for the bone is touching the membrane; and he gets dizzy and nauseous, a great deal of blood comes out, and it is a sign of grave illness, and the old ones have put up a great effort.
And if any of those who serve say that he should administer meat that swells the belly, to push the break toward the outside.
We do not do this, except when the abscesses are hot, unless they have come. And if it has come, then let the skin be well-cured.
And they say that we should put vacuums on the spot, to suck out the excess, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, doubt arises that the vacuum might attract the excesses to the spot due to weakness of disposition.
And they say that we should cover the spot with another dry and oiled cloth, and place something between the sides to even out the moisture, then it is cured with the cure for plagues, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that protrudes from the flesh, then doubt is in the patient; so it is necessary to split at the top of the rib that is broken, and to put there an instrument for holding the medicine; and then the bone must be split, and pulled lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if the abscesses come out, so put them on cloth drenched in oil, and put them in place; and cure while the place where it is necessary for an absces to come, and be gentle on the rib where it must be, until he is well.
of the break at the neck
No time comes when the bones of the neck break, and there is no pain; and also to the back. And when it is so that there is no pain in either one, and you know if he will be well or not, if you feel his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, if he does not feel it. Know that it is deadly in many dispositions, and that if they are moved and felt, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, if cure is put on him.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you can see whether it is healthy or not, if the muscles are soft, and the accident that is in the hands, and on the back, windiness and digestion without will; and when it is revived on its belly, if digestion without will. And when it is revived on its back and it stiffens, it cannot. Know that it is deadly: so I would not work in its cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, he is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess, put oil or mutton fat on the spine, so that it is calmed down; then put on a compress of confortant and drying, and tie it with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healthy. And if some bones are dislocated, cover it with the cure; and break the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with ointment of char in the meantime until it is healthy; and if the head of the shoulder is dislocated, it is called the "head of the collarbone", you hold it with your left hand, and put the plaster and plate on it, if you need to do so; then secure it, and if there are any bones that have come out, set them back in place, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
There was a possibility that the bone of the thigh might be fractured, and if so, that it would only be a small break at the top; let it grow long, and decline to the left side, and there is great pain for the patient in that place, and swelling where it is broken.
And the setting-right [restoration] is that you extend your hand towards it as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make it equal in length to that which is in a natural state.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then bring the patient to her stomach, so that the setting-right of that break may be made for you. And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then place a stake of wood or timber upon it, and hold the break so that it does not move; and set the joints on both sides, as long as the limb is even.
And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if an abscess comes, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and put that which we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold it so that there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joints are what connects the neck to the top of the shoulder blade, and when it's broken, there are two ways to fix it: either with a wooden dowel or with a metal plate. With the former, you take a piece of wood that is wider than the joint but not so wide as to interfere with movement; then,
And take two joints of wood that are long and strong, and tie them together at the top, and cut the patient on one side; then lay him down on his back with his arms by his sides, so that he does not move; and have a wooden dowel ready, and then place it under his shoulder blade with a weight on top of it; then take the broken joint and make it even with his hand, until the break returns as it should.
And the other way is that if you can wake the patient up, you hold his hand on his neck; then order two ministers: one to hold what is on the break even with his hand, and the other to hold down all the joints, and spread them out to their own parts.
And if you see that the extraction is too difficult, then stretch one joint out even with the break, and another on top of it, and spread them both out to their own parts; And if the break is near the top of the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to place a wooden dowel gently under the socket, and another one towards the neck, evenly with the break; then make the break even, as it should be, and hold it, unless an abscess appears.
And if the abscesses come, do not extract them until .vij. days have passed, and put on a bandage of salt and rose oil, as long as the abscesses are calm; then extract them, and the way to extract them is that you put the plaster on the split, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the lou [elbow]; and wrap him up, and extract it by the joint, and by his arm, so that his arm is in its place of stars, if nothing harms it or if his bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use stars, and put on the split a wider and stronger star than the others, and have between each star 1 2 inches of space, and let each star be so large that it passes the split 1 3 times on either side; then extract on the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the plaster on the split, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stars and the extraction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess hot, leave it tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe each 1 2 days whether the swelling comes or not to the place, or if the redness does not appear at the member because it is too tight. If it does, put plaster on it, as we have said.
And if such an accident does not occur, do not remove the shoulder unless it has been three or more days, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and place the aid between the toes of the foot, evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night to make sure that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become softer; if so, treat it by the virtue of medicine, and give him meat as we have said before, in such a way that the meat is at the first level; and when he begins to improve, let it be thick. It is customary that the aid and leg should be removed after ten months; then you must remove it and administer bath and medicines for the application of oil. And if the rigor is ugly and blocked, do not remove it until one or two months have passed.
Of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one being small, and that one is attached to the wrist; and the other is large, and that one is attached at the shoulder. Perhaps one or both of these bones may break, either by itself alone, or together.
When the small fire is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the great one is broken, it is bad healing, and more painful than when it is broken all together. If it is only the small fire that is broken, then what is right to do is to extend it lightly, and make it even.
And if it is the great fire that needs to be stretched more; and extend it on .i. cussin, and darken the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, and let the patient cross themselves over him in the middle, and .i. cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers by their arms to the part where their hand is, or a .i. ligature, and other ministers on top of them. And then make the pouchet even, according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, then place each one in its place, and if any of them do not want to hold on to the three, and you cannot reset it in its place, then put it on top of the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the break, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the treatment there are abscesses, then use a poultice made of oil rosin and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and place it gently above the abscess until the swelling has subsided. And then remove the rosin, and put the plaster of the powder from the mill with much egg, and put the bandages on, and let the break be a little wider than the others; and know that there should be vj. bandages or more in various places: whether the break is in one bone, or in two; and stretch it more above the break than anywhere else, and always less as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread that is stretched from linen be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And treat the limb and the ligature after some days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itch that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you soak the member with hot water until the itching has subsided; and let the member rest without being too tight. And then start again with the stretching, and if the ligature is soft and the bone has moved, and similar things, then adjust it.
And if the stretching should not come to the member, because it is too tight, then make it soft a little way, and leave it thus for some days, until the stretching comes, and then stretch it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then he will not be able until .xx. days; or if they do not heal, then he will hold his hands to his neck, and make his neck even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruiser is healed in .xxx. days or in .xxxv. days, and perhaps in .xx. days according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and on our two hands there are few fractures, and come only that many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, then it is appropriate that the patient should cross his arms, and if he sits straight in front of him even; then put his hand on an extended towel, and extend the broken bones, and put them together even, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and stitches, if any, then put a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in 1. drapeil of linen.
And if it breaks in the garden between the legs of the plant, so make a rope out of sheets, and order the patient that he estrings it to its broken plant; and then extract it from a long sheet, and its string as large as the plant of the hand, and extract it, as is right.
And if it breaks in the back, so that you put a string on top of it, and another one at the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tie the rope between the two.
And if it breaks on one of the two legs, so that it is even, so that you tie it up, as is right; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that there is a small right string to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if it breaks on the other leg, so that it is even, and tie it up with the healthy leg that comes after; or tie them all together, holding back, so that they do not hurt each other, or put a string on it, as I have said; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come to mind, as I said.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister to his side equally; and that is when the fracture is set into the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the groin, then so is one of the links on his side, and the others beside the fracture; and if it is near the knee, then so are the links on either side of the knee, and the extension downward; then put the mirror to the bone equally with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster on, and tie it up, so that the chas do not come.
And if there is a chausie, then let it be calm and return to your work and your cure; the work is done in some way. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture i . e. a bandage of tough twine in ii or iii joints, and wait for the excess fluid, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, releasing the knee joint, and bring the head with the thread above; then turn on the leg and bandage, then put on the fracture braces, and put a brace on the bone of the leg; then use the stretch between the leg and the thigh of drapeels so that it is equal to the compression, then begin to bind form ii or iii twists on the fracture; and when you go up more on the fracture, and less the compression; then tie the 2 braces that are above, then return to the release at the head of the thread, until you come off from the foot; and let it be so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and if he comes no fever or swelling or any other appearance.
If it happens, if it lets go and turns this way or that, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold, if it is possible to do so, yes; and if it is not possible, if it is necessary to split the place and draw out firmly; and cure it as we have said, until he is well.
And never does the thigh break in this way when we put braces on it, as in the aid and at the arm; however, in the restoration in this way done does not alarm the patient.
And know that the cure is completed within a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the neck down
Saiches that in the neck area there is sometimes a fracture, but it often heals many times. And if it breaks, let it be only a crack or a hole, and not a wound, for this feels good.
And let the restoration be such that what is broken at both ends is made equal, as much as it can be; then put the plaster on, and put a round stake, if you need one, and hold it in place as it should be, and follow all the dispositions we have said for other breaks, such as an aposteme, and others that seem necessary; and let each accident have what is needed to be healed.
of the break of the leg
Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are similar to those of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done as with that of the arm equally, and the workings are all alike.
And if both bones break together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thin bone breaks, then it turns forwards.
And if the large bone is broken, so that one feels great pain and sees it well; then return to dislocation. Then prepare an extension, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but, nevertheless, it is fitting that the fracture should be ugly, and it has more pieces, so that the extension should be smaller and lighter; and make it even according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, so take 30 pieces of rope that color the leg on one side and another, and let them be long from the ankle up to the dislocation; then wrap them in 31 bands above and below, and bind it firmly in the middle, and at this binding cannot move the leg to the right or left, and so is good; and no one administer 30 bands of rope, and if it is rope, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture or there is a sore; and stir each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if heal as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bone of the foot comes in several fractures and in two places, and it happens only that it is broken in more than one way.
And if it should happen that the bones of your foot are broken and you see these bones overtopping one another, then put this patient down upon the earth as if he would walk, and now place your foot upon his own, where the bones are raised up again, then press them together as much as they will go back into their places; then place the plaster and fill it in, and put a small table of 10.5 inches square at the bottom of your foot, then fasten it to the front of the foot, then you have wrapped your drapes and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then lift up the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, then reset them, as we have said for the hands; then put a small piece of wood between the two according to their length, and make it one size larger, then put the little table on the foot as I said, and strain it forward; and if there are more than three or four pieces broken, then each one should have a piece of wood according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen drape, and the table should be straining behind the foot; and let it hang down from the top of the table so that it covers the foot well.
And you should not forget the other things that I said for breaking things; and attend to each injury as it occurs.
from breaking of the bone with a knuckle
When the bone is broken in the nature of a woman, if she is sat up enlarged, then she is tilted to the part of the back, and held behind; then fill the bail with cotton, and put there as much as 40 pounds; then turn the woman over, and tap the back little by little, and then drop the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the pound; and when she goes to piss, if she holds the cotton, and when she has pissed, let her put it back again, and so do 15 days or more: then will be restored the break, and if she is dead, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a chain to the crotch, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow in the chain shaping, until the bladder is gone inside: the nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
And when the knuckle bone of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use thereon, and listens to my book. For the break, therefore, signifies many things in the right way of restoration: hear it then.
In the hymen, when it is broken, take an oiled goose and pour the oil onto the hymen; then wrap drapes around, and leave them 2-3 days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
from rupture with wound
For those who have a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, let it be healed now, so that the healing that we have described serves as a witness.
And if the wound heals, unless there is another injury, then begin to restore the fracture in this same hour, or that very day, for the bones of the hip and shoulder or similar do not heal quickly.
And if the bones begin to heal, do not continue the restoration work until the next day, provided that the bones are calm and there is no pain; for you would bring about a bad accident if you worked on them for three or four days.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on both sides of the bridge; so that you should put it gently with your hands to extend it slightly.
And if the extensions do not align your hands so that they are equal in length, take this instrument made of iron, which has 2.5 inches or 3 inches of length, and its thickness is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he immerse himself in mirrhe that he takes 3 or 4 drops, according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your touch, and be sharp before, and thick in the middle:
And it is called "palainche", because the head of the shoulder that is dislocated must be placed on the top of the bone; and tap once, until he recovers, and make them equal one to another. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must cut the top of the bone until the instrument can take it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, in your power; then cut this one that remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is set back in place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. If it is in its natural position, then soak it. I.e., wrap it in black wine-styptic cloth, and make sure it is clean; and do not put any tar or other oil on it where there is oil, so that it does not cause pus and corruption to come forth; then administer balsam when you have set the bone back in place, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not tightened with the break; and many times this has been done to the sick, both those who are dead or corroded; and the ligatures are softer and more gentle than others.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident has not come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it does not suit you to put on esteles; but wrap them up hard, in place of esteles, with tough wraps, and tie them. And when you see after 1 day or 2 days a bow come to the wound, if you take off what you have put on it all wet, and apply healing ointments, as healing tetrafarcion and others.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb 2 times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and whole.
And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the bow moves down lightly.
And if someone runs and cannot fix it but comes together again like this, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, you should put a wound on it, and remove all these painful pieces.
And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opens on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar bones of large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but let it rot; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
And the bruses that come out of the ground:
We come back again to the health of the broken, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is a foul sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make its natural movements.
Take care therefore that we come back to the health of the broken, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is a foul sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make its natural movements.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and remains after weak and thin members for some causes: because one is too tied up, and was not tied up so as it should be; or because there are too many joints, and cannot come to the member's aid; or because of many injuries; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because he has little blood in his body, so weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the torso soft, as many times as the sun rises in him; and he bathes it, and gives it pleasure and joy; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and he rinses it often with warm water, until the swelling corre to the member; and return to its natural shape.
the tortured member after sickness
When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural work: do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and such works are blamed, and great harm and even death may result; however, if the nodules and tortures are fresh, it is good to bathe them with hot water, or with soft herbs boiled, such as lamb's ذيل، and melilot، and similar things; and make an ointment. i.e., a mixture of melilot with lard or oil of sesame, and put the ointment on; or take fat figs, and crush them with hay from colon, and other medicines that soften the swelling.
And there is no need to break the bone again to rub it continually and for a long time with moist hands. And move the member every hour.
And if the stiffness is strong and hardened, just as with a stone, it must be cut with a sharp knife lightly; and put on a leech and study in the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, if it is now brought back into place, then let it not be pulled again.
Car s'on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c'on le déplace à l'oure qu'il est enflé: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
For if it is delayed, and the swelling increases, and by chance it is put back in place at its original location; for this does not come well, that one moves it before it has decreased: many times it brings spam and other pains; however, when this happens, take care of the patient, then let him rest, until the abscess has calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each member as the wound heals.
And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder blade until it is completely healed.
The jaw.
And so the jaws should be dislocated upward, and the dislocations of both are according to .ij. ways: or they are a little out of place, and soften a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down toward the chest, and cut the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with words.
When the dislocations are small, return them to their original positions by means of numerous configurations.
And if it is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the malady, and pour a little water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocations are of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be far away, to make it equal; and command to the disease that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
And he looks at the bone equal, as long as it is found in its place.
And he is brought back in place, especially if the two jawbones are together, but with warm water and oil, a little at a time; do not delay bringing it back as we have said.
And when they are brought back in equal position, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a mild poultice made of oil and wax, then put it gently on a bed covered with moistened drapes;
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his cheeks are between two pillows, so that he does not move or strain at all, but eats soft food until the pains have gone away, and the jaws have healed;
and then gently cut what needs to be cut, and do not work to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their place within an hour and are not restored to their places, then fevers and unusual heat will come, and perhaps a stomach upset, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a bad sign; and often many die who have it, in seventeen days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from the cost at its base and along its length, and it is dislocated many times at the edge and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster over it and bandage it, and hold it in place;
and the shoulder that is toward the chest cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all, if one returns it to its place as we have said; then put the plaster on it and bandage it, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is well;
and thus the dislocation of the shoulder, when it is removed from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
that the shoulder is dislocated only two ways: either because of a fall or because it has been struck; and the second is in the upper part of the joint, and sometimes in the lower part, and rarely on top; and this happens little.
and never dislocates behind the shoulder, and never dislocates inside the shoulder blade; and many times it dislocates forward towards the arm, but only when they have fallen; for those who have enough money to go to hospital, there is no problem, but for those who do not have enough money, they go back home with pain.
and sometimes there is an impact or breaking of the shoulder by a blow from above, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
And a dislocation occurs when it is turned downward toward the shoulder, and you will find a clear difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will see between them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and set the shoulder to the touch, at the head of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its neck, nor move any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated upward, so it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch.
and this manner of dislocation is not just to bring back when it is new, or the patient has fallen ill.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then place your thimble above the joint, and raise the joint with force to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, and then put it back; so come to hospital quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the hands of days later, it is convenient that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister administer soothing and softening, as a decoction of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and be administered;
and then let the sick person lie on his back, and place on the shoulder a thimble of equal size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the minister's foot on the thimble, and lift the hand of the sick person gently;
and let others ministers burn the chief of the shoulder of the disease, so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see if you do it according to this way:
and so that you have it present .i. a man who is greater than the disease; and be right towards the coast, and turn down the shoulder of the patient, and lift up the shoulder in height, so that the patient hangs by the armpit; and let others ministers pull the hand of the disease down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then go with him something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
And the ram is also done in another way: and it is 1st. a long stick in the earth, whose head is also as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small; And then set the fire cautery on the patient, but that it have a drape of wool upon it, and let the patient be lying long in the bed; then extend his hand from one side to another, so that the joint returns to its place.
And if it does not return because of all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take .i. beam of .iiij. arms long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head standing on the end so that it can enter into it perfectly dislocated the joint, according to this form:
Then put it on the top of the head with a drape of wool so that it does not harm the patient, and then set it on the shoulder; and extend your arms up the long back, and place the aid on the top of the back, and the hand at the top of the head, and then put the arm on 1/4 of a stone's width, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from one side: the joint will now return.
Then when it is in place, in whatever way, so that you put on the shoulder a woolen ball equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris, all over the shoulder and around, then strain it out of the shoulder forward, and tie it on the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands be in place.
And it is necessary that he sweat a little while the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then sweat him more after .v. days or .vij., and move him. And if he is stiffened and is not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you apply the cauterization to three times, as it is placed before or with the paste of the cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and he sweats after .vij. days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm overhead, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are either cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never been placed back in its place.
The dislocation that is above the shoulder blade, and the shoulders, or behind, is made by impact, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and heal as long as it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is healed, and returns to its first nature.
Of the dislocation of the neck
Says that the joint of the neck is dislocated in one place and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for it can be seen and felt clearly; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the bad neck with good health, if you can see it openly. For the joint is cut off, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder on all sides.
And you must bring it back in the same way as the aphorisms and the vein comes, because if the aphorisms and the vein come, it is grieved to be brought back; and by chance it cannot be brought back all at once, but more so when it is behind; it hurts more than other dislocations, and by chance it leads to death.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the hand according to the heart from behind and from the side, and press the joint to its roots together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and firm from the root of the palm the ear that is down;
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and is that the two minister extend the arm, and tint them two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth;
and when he grasps the joint with his hand, if it does not contain any oil to smooth the joint, then form the joint tightly until it regains its movement.
and when it is in place, if you put plaster dry with ash of olive, and strain it firmly, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then release it slowly.
And if the joint is firmly in place, then release the ligature, and leave it; and if you see that the joint has not healed well, then begin again with plaster and the ligature, and leave it for a while, until it is firmly in place; then release it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a sheep fat cream, then leave it for a day and a night, then wash it, and let it enter or bathe; and when he sues, he rubs the joint gently, then puts on the new one and then goes in or bath; and so do .ij times or .iij., until he is healthy; and if you see it, put on the end of the wet horse with melted butter, and pull it up; it will come back to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocated hand comes back easily, more so than other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, especially when the joint is swollen or there is an abscess.
And the re-positioning is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and he looks at it to make them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it comes back.
All the same, it is necessary that you look to see if he is in the right place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the sick person' s back of his hand on a table and look at the appearance of the joint; if it comes back now, it is good.
If not, then cut off the excess skin around the joint, and let him leave in this way weakened.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back after a few days, then let the joint turn;
and it cannot extract anything completely: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other mechanism except to extract by fire cautery; and perhaps there is nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put fire cautery on as we said; then extract and leave it for a while; then dislocate and leave it thus.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then the hot water moisten it and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the two hands.
None are dislocated on either side of the hand to each part, none on the back of the palm or the belly;
Therefore are the two, and bottle up the dislocation to your fists until it revives, then hold the head of the two, and lean it towards the part where it is joined;
and then let it be for .ij. turns, and then put it equal that day; and of not, so as we have said, and dislodge from day, and make it move, and relock it; and do this often, until it is tight,
and do this too, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, if it is dislocated from the other side.
Do not dislocate the shoulder of the horse at the height of the withers.
When the horse's withers or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there can be no cure because it quickly kills the animal.
And the signs are that the excretion is without control, and cannot be held back, and many limbs are weakened, or the two legs or the two arms or one leg .
And often the shoulder is mute in three parts; that which is mute at the rear is called "gilbosite".
If his hunchback came from childhood then he can be cured; if not, there is no cure or recovery for him at all.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with great words, which do not give any great benefit;
but I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the hunchback that comes before the pitch, there is no remedy or health;
and this is the first sentence I will translate for you:
and so that the patient is extended on his back in an even position and has not had any strain placed on him, so that he does not bleed;
then put 1. tinder to the head on the ground formed, and 1. other at the feet, and tie a knot over the patient's eyes, and 1. other at the ankles, and at the knees, and at the hips;
and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the 2. tinders;
and are well closed, the twig as we have said, and the mirror sets its palms on the spine forming, until he revives.
And if she does not recover with this cure, then take a table of  .iij. arms long, and shove it against the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and dip the head of the table against the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and let the mirror put its palms on the other head of the table, and press well, until he revives to his place; and if you see this, do it at the turner that turns in the hand.
And it is that you put .iij. torches at the head of the sick person with an arm long, and between each torch, one above and one below, a palm's space apart;
and place in each log .i. pierce, or the pole runs, and let the logs firmly be in the ground so that they do not move, and between each two logs let there be one log turning, so that the bond turns, and let there be in each of two turning logs .i. turning pole of a palm long, to turn the pole.
and then tie the bond that is between the logs to the pole at the top, and the other bond towards the poles at the other end, and each of the servants turns its bond to all the log, and the master places the stake evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put on desiccant with much ash, and then the stakes, and then the stake of a tablet of a palm long, that by purifying the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie a bond of a log, as we have said, and use subtle emollient to him until he is healthy;
and if anything comes to an end in the health of it, if necessary administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stake that we have said above; and never administer a piece of lead.
and never comes the appearance behind the spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and this bone which opens, so that one should not have presumption: by chance would come death.
of dislocations of the hip joint
that the hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to three.iiij. parties: inside and outside, and before and behind, and more inside, and less before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the sick foot than the healthy one, and cannot bend the sick knee on fire; and is the limb which is swollen with feverish heat from an abscess, for the head of the hip comes to lie there.
And the sign of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above.
And the signs of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above. However, if his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double the knee due to pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot do so before, and reten
And the signs of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above. However, if his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double the knee due to pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot do so before, and reten
If the dislocation is old and delays according to its habit, there is no cure for it; and it is only right that he should have been presumptuous.
And in that which the dislocation is new, and it is of the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and turn it inside and out, and move it to the right and to the left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not come back in this way, you must have very strong help, and firmly support the leg with two hands, or a ligature tied on the knee; and others extend their hand above him in such a way that they press their hands together, then tie a ligature around his thigh; and others hold the hair of the ligature;
and extend up and down all at once, as long as the sick person is raised from the ground once, and remain so.
This manner of extension is common to three resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then you should put the patient on his back. When the dislocations are in the paregorico position, if it is convenient that you put the sick person on his side, then set the ligature on the root of the hip, and the line that is removed from the angle, then extend the ligature upwards towards the angle, and upwards towards the forceps;
then pull the arms of the sick person, and embrace the large line of the hip, and extend it to the side: so he will return to his position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot fasten it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong thread under the .ij. heels, and under the .ij. knees, so that the sick leg is longer than the other by .ij. two;
Then hang him by the neck of a post, and be above ground 2 arms long; then order 1 minister to embrace the hip of the patient, and let others hang down with the patient, who embrace his hips firmly, because the joints will come back into place quickly.
And when the dislocation is far away, if the patient lies down as we have said in the case of gilo-boseity, and draws 1 thread properly on the sick leg, and also on the foot;
then put 2 torches, 1 at the head and 1 at the feet, then put 1 torch between the hips of the patient so that it goes in his middle; and put on him a wet cloth from behind, that he may not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the doctor set the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on a .ie. table and press him as we said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, extend the injured leg outward, and according to what I have said; and let the doctor put his hand on it from behind, then press with the other hand, and raise it towards the hip.
And when the dislocation is on one side, so it is not possible to extend the injured leg outward, nor to raise it towards the hip; then it is necessary that he should lie on his back with both legs outstretched, as we have said in the sleep on the two hips. and is placed on its face, and the limb extends as we have said above, and must be firmly pressed against the table;
and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then take the poultice, and put on the plaster, and extract an arrow, so that the shin does not move;
and rests for three days or four, then unbinds it, and puts on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, as before, and leaves it in place. three days; then unbinds it, and lets him bark loudly, until the limbs are comfortable again.
of the dislocation of the kneecap
The genoux is dislocated according to three ways: namely, inward, outward, and rearward; do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not bend it at the knee, that he is dislocated.
and the treatment for all of this is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your legs;
then take his knee with your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the .iij. knees together like a knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he has moved his leg at the knee lightly;
and place the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the lap, and bind it together tightly .iii or .iv days, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are not comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, then give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
from the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never fully dislocated or realigned, and they go in and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out.
The following text is the translation of the provided Old French text:
And when it has come out completely, so that you make the patient lie down flat on his back, and tie him up by the leg, above the ankle;
And then try the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand, and then again with your right hand, and then stretch it out, and blow on the foot well;
and do this .ij. times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, then begin again with the work, for it will return;
if it cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place 1 pass firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around it, so that he does not injure the patient;
then put the minister's hand on his buttocks, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to .i. a cord, so that he lays it on the top of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and place the cloth tight between the patient's buttocks to hold the patient in place while you are working;
Then make the patient's dislocated arm equal with his hands, and other ministers will dye the healthy leg with tar, and the dislocation will return completely.
And when it is ready, if you apply the plaster and wrap it up tightly, and form the bandage well, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons behind the ankle being too tight;
then let it rest for .ij. or .iij., and if the bandage is loose, then untie it after three or four days, and do not send the patient away before .iiij. days have passed; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses form quickly, then it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy again.
of the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is gently extended without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a bed or table all straight, and place your foot on what opens up these joints, and then press with your foot in this form, until he returns;
and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then put the foot on a table of .ij. shoulders, then extract it shaped, and leave it .iiij. days, then unpick it; and let it rest as long as it is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow to anger, do not be arrogant:
and use at the beginning of things soothing ointment, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope for health; and when you see hope, so I put back the member in place, that way the soothing ointment will come;
and when the member is in place, so administer soothing ointment, and cure the wound, as appropriate, with dry compresses;
and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and small bones are broken, if the bones, do as we have said in simple illnesses;
and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you dear according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body. Amen.
