O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I made the end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, the science has been lost and severed, and nothing remains of its force except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and science is kept at a distance.
Here it seems to me that I should animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who undertakes this should excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting places of them, and where their channels originate.
And Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should be careful not to make mistakes and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and also cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
And I saw another case where a knight of our land had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the ignorant doctors set the break above the wound with a strong bandage, and they left no padding on the wound, but left it with a bandage; and they ordered him not to remove it. And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen, as well as the foot, and he lost his limb.
I was called to attend to him, and I hurried to loosen the bandage on his leg; and when I had loosened it he was in peace and felt no pain.
However, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the limb was completely destroyed.
And I saw another case where a doctor lanced an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Because when a ulcer is free of melancholy humor, it must not be touched with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish person cannot speak badly of you.
Then take up your weapons in confidence and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and rid yourself of that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the next one of glory.
Galiens says in one of his warnings: "Do not worry about any illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it covers the head down to the feet; also included are the forms of instruments and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary for the practice.
The second chapter is about binding and strangulation, and arrow wounds, and stings, and venomous animal bites, and deadly wounds that come from piercing or strangulation; also included are the instruments used in these cases.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of each temperament and their harmful effects.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are among the most lengthy subjects and subtle sciences, and their secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about these, and agreed on this: and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I abhor lengthiness.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, be it one of two complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
In hot and dry complexions, some people say that cautery is very helpful; others say the opposite, that cautery is not useful for diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery is very effective for hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of humans. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, one should not meddle with it unless they have experience with cauterization and a long-standing understanding of the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, their outcomes, and the seasons; we fear not at all for other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
For fire is simple, and it does not spread to any other part of the body apart from where it is applied, and it does no harm if properly used.
Burning remedies spread from one part of the body to another by radiation, and bring about a healing crisis in the sick person; and sometimes they cure the disease.
Fire, because of its hotness and the goodness of its nature, does not harm, unless there is an excess.
And I have found this to be true through experiment and through the length of my service and study in medicine, and from being conversant with the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my explanation, because it does not please me to take away the secret which is contained within fire, or the nature of its action in healing diseases, as the philosopher describes. So receive this into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness that arises underneath is removed by the help of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary, urgent pains that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than other medicines because of their swiftness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordship.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the place of the disease, and its strength; and the excesses are gathered in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, if cauteries are not administered in a place where there is little excess and moisture, as in dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancient ones said that cauteries made of gold instruments are milder than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found it to be so in some people.
And yet, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there is sufficient precaution.Et il faut que li cauteristes soit bon esprouviers, car oncques ne doit il aler trop lor; et il doit veoir si il est chaus por la color, et ne doit il le chaufer de plusors; et s’il l’alait trop, il ne le doit pas faire, car il en viendrat grant mal.
And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Here I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types of disease caused by it, one called "soda", and by many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and also from many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the condition, age, and tolerance of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; afterward, place the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle finger comes to, there will you apply the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it is made:
And place it upon the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down in a twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, and feel for the bone with your finger; if you do not feel the bone, repeat the cautery as I have instructed until you feel the bone; afterward, take some salt, place it in a piece of cloth, and apply it to the wound; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called  "tetrafarmaçon" until the wound is healed.
And the ancients say that the more the wound remains open, the more it purges itself; and because of this, they recommend using a poultice.
And some say that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone resected and then cured.
And others say that one should let the cautery burn so much, and press so hard that one removes bone as wide as a needle that women put in their fuse to allow fluids to flow out; then one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must cure and bandage it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except in some people where there is fear; and I think I should leave it alone; for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, and with this I work together for salvation.
of the old pain in the head
When chronic pain lasts a long time in the entire head, one should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters. If they then perform the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it is ineffective,
Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it under this fire cautery a little bit as we said above.
Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do one cautery in the place called "vasselz"; and there is a place for which cupping glasses are used; and lighten your hand so that you do not go to the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than from the others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and its shape is:
of the cautery of the head: When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has performed the other treatments I have described in the section on diseases, and none of this helps; then one should apply cauteries in two ways, that is, with a hot iron and with fire.
For the cautery with a hot iron, take an almond and remove its shell and coat it in honey; then press it onto both shoulders for about twelve minutes, and once it is pressed on, tie it firmly in place and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and move it away from the almond, leaving the wound as it is for two or three days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter over the wound until suppuration occurs.
After the wound has healed, apply ointment until it is completely healed; and if you wish, use one of the burning remedies I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning remedies.
The fire cautery is performed in the following manner. Heat the cautery iron until it is red-hot and then apply it to the wound in the shape of a cross, making sure not to hold it on for too long so as not to burn the patient.
And it is called a "clot" because the head is formed in the shape of a clot with a little hollow in the middle, and it is placed over the painful area, and you hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; and then take away your hand so that the artery does not burn, for it will burst and blood will flow abundantly.
Afterwards, put cotton in wine and place it on the spot for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is cured; and if you wish to cauterize this hematoma with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at the very tip, but be careful not to touch the artery in this hematoma, which is not an old one.
of hematoma
When you cure hematoma as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine, whether with fire or with iron, do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus on the painful area a line half a digit long, and take away your hand once, and press so that you do not touch the artery and so that the blood does not flow to the bone; and be careful of the jaw so that it does not bite when one chews, and the nerve has no sensation, and so that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear, especially to those who are not familiar or experienced with it; and leave the wound open; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood from an artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better and more effective.
from pain in the ears due to coldness
When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», with which there is a needle at its end:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then move a little way up from the root of the ear once you have marked the area to be cauterized; and there should be .x. points around each ear; afterwards treat the area until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
There is no cautery for the torments of the mouth except those that come from pus, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve-spasm.
When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from pus, fluids, and discharges from the head, and from gargling, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little way above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the ear above the horn of the head a little way underneath, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the appearance of the scalpel that we mentioned before, but it is a little more slender and the blade should be a little thicker; afterwards treat the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large pills and purgatives to cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and apply to the back of the neck the plaster of mustard which is written about in the book on plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one and a half inches between each cautery; and cure him as with the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called "olive", as I have said before.
of cold from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and anything else that we have previously mentioned; then raise the head of the patient, and make cauterization on the head and on each horn, one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the disease is strong, he makes four cauterizations upon the spine of the back; and let him be until the heart is burned most, then lift your hand; after cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery called "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meats; after that, the king will take the head in the middle, and he will make .a cautery according to what we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive wood according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in an infant, make a small cautery according to this method:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
After the head of the sick person has been shaved, then make a tourniquet out of linen well-made, as a circle, and put it around the head; and tie the patient's arms in a cross, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the plaster, and add some mastic of old mutton tallow; heat it gently over fire so that it can be endured when applied; then remove the tourniquet from inside the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the sick person once a week with proper care, until they are healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small points all over the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in tallow and chicken fat on top.
of their eyes When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After commanding him to raise his head, and he cauterizes him in the head, and he makes 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descents of the eyes are together, or in 1 if the descent is in 1; and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how you should stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or cutting is made under the 2 bones at the back.
where the body weeps
When the tears are old and accustomed, and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I have said in the descent of the eyes: 1 cauterization in the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauterizations or cutting under the 2 bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
from the body through the eyes
When you treat him according to what we have said in the discussion, and he does not improve, then give the patient four nights of bleeding; then cut his head, and cauterize him with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two joints, one a little under the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery. And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare." And this is how you make it:
And if you see that there are two warts as long as the warts themselves; and do not leave your hand on them except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are reversed and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two methods: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they sprout and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, draw on paper a figure which is also like the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and the mucous membrane of an onion over the eye, then heat the cautery so that this is the shape:
After that, cauterize on the figure you have marked little by little many times, until the area is burned; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper pull back, and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it thus for 3 days, then put wet cotton in lard as long as the scald is healed; after that cure with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on the same spot, just as you did before; and if the hairs are pulled out, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and are even, and do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make on parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coals, of each 1/3, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it under the eye; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if both, then do the same; and put wet cotton in egg white under the eye; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press 1 little bit and move it all the time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels biting just as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body. And when the bite has passed, lift the area, and examine if you see the skin lifted as it was by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine failed to work, until your efforts are equal, and your eyes are focused; then apply wet cotton in butter until the burn scars are closed, after which clean the area with an ointment called "diafenes" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not harm your eyes, and if the skin becomes soft after the bite, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area which is softened by the skin properly, just as you did before; then clean it once it is healed; and this is the method for the myrrh poultice:
And know that men's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this, your techniques should vary; and the correct method should not be rejected for someone who has studied this art.
on the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this manner. Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between your hands so that it does not move or nod; then moisten cotton with egg white or juice of purslane and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery tool which is shaped like a pen, with a point at one end and rounded at the other, although the one with a point is better for your purpose.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and draw out the pus; then apply the hot cautery tool firmly to the eye, holding it steady with your hand so that it does not move; place the cautery directly on the eyelid, corrupting the eyelid.
If you reach the bone with the cautery, that is good. If not, repeat the cautery once more, and do so again if necessary, then leave it for three days; after that, apply wet cotton on butter, and treat the wound with a drying ointment until it heals; and if 40 days pass without healing, apply an corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and treat the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of performing cautery on a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of. Make an incision at the site of the fistula, and cut into the wound; afterwards, insert a thin needle made of copper, for this is where the form lies: and they make it the size of a bean; and hold your hand or the needle firmly so that the patient does not move, causing the molten lead to flow into his eye; and one should apply wet cotton on the patient's eye, the lead will heal the fistula miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have described, that is good. If not, one should administer a poultice to the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," and especially so in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have described above in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small blade-like cautery according to this form:
And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with cerot until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, causing swelling and redness and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said under 'fistulas', and it does not heal: then you should have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleansing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches its depth and the back; do this once or twice, after cleaning as we have said under 'cleaning', until it is healed; if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone according to what you find in your examination of the patient.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a piece of iron on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reheat the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with warm salt water, and let it rest for an hour and release the forces.
And in this manner, the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the putrid moisture is dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautery with butter: take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the moistened cotton and butter cooling off, apply it to the aching tooth and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this several times, for the pain will be relieved on the same day or the next. And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter at the time of the cautery, and then rinse afterward; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and is disobedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery of which the form will come later, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if needed, going to the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days. Then dress the wound with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the abdomen, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medications. Then make a cautery at the root of the throat, but be careful not to go all the way to the throat, and don't burn the heart, just a little bit. Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle', as we have described its form earlier; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the abdomen are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in the usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; and use the cautery called 'clavicle' according to the form described earlier.
And if you see, make a cautery in the point with all the cauteries that are called 'points', as the form is described earlier for ear diseases; and let the points be up to thirty, or however far apart. After curing the area according to what was said before, and let there be three cauteries according to this form:
And therefore are cauteries easier to do, because you make them .iiij. times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, stroke the patient's back and side; then lift the chest cavity with your left hand fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves like this:
And cauterize the scrotum until it pierces through to the skin, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and for this reason a cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, because there are six cauteries in the form of cauterization, and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs:
And sometimes it is placed upon this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries on it.
Afterwards, place crushed shells upon the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, afterwards cauterize upon the thickness of the cautery with a claw-shaped cautery, or many cauteries in a point. For the jointure is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
with the cautery of phlegmon
The ancients said that one must make cauteries of roots of aristologus on phlegmon, and in the following manner: take a root of aristologus which is long, the thickest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, and heat it, and cauterize with one large cautery between the throat and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part which lies under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and one cautery between the navel and stomach, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the navel, departing from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when perfuming.
And some ancients said that some use a cautery made like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the phlegmon; and when it leaps from the pain, as we have said in the phlegmon of the liver. But in this work there is now fear or death to the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they rely on three methods of cautery which are all good.
One of these methods is to make three or four cauteries, by drawing according to the length of the moon, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand down on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie carefully on his back.
And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and feel the nerve that is towards the moon, where the pain comes from the left side, and lift the nerve according to the elevation, along with the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, insert the two prongs into the inflamed nerves until the nerve is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize all the cautery on three nerves. After the treatment, when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is better than any of the other treatments mentioned earlier.
of dropsy
Cauterization does not benefit a dropsy patient, except in the manner that is called "asclytes." When you treat him according to the methods that we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the belly, and 1 on the stomach, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the spleen, and .i on the bladder, and .ij behind the back on the spine, and 1 in the groin; and the cautery should be close to the base of the heart.
After that, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clave that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
of swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus pushing out the yellow water, and let the cautery be in this shape:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the metatarsal bone; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without bandaging, until the water comes out; then bandage it after the other bandages that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, as the retentive and digestive powers that reside in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before concerning the cautery of the stomach, using the circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, one large cautery on each hip.
And if you see abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids:
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, either one or more, and are old and filled with cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is completely beneath the armpit, little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery beneath the hip. two times;
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell up, then on the face put a large cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse on all the cautery clave; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut the thelul, scorch the cautery which looks like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and keep your hand so that the cauteries reach the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
of a badly cured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula appears and it is swollen and exudes pus and corrupted moisture, you should first test it with a small needle, and be careful that you know how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery as if it were a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to its size, and repeat the cautery until the corruption is burned, once or twice or thrice, according to its need; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large vessels. If the fistula goes toward the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not apply heat to bone, and think that it is insensitive; after cure the area until it is healed, and if the place is swollen and the materials are not removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed. If the material is not removed, know that the place is damaged and the bone at the bottom is rotten; and thus as one of those which we will discuss in their places.
of kidney disease When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not take on the taste of a woman, then you should cauterize him on the kidneys on both sides with the key-shaped cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize him in the middle, he will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and flabby from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then he should be cauterized on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as a man's fingernail; and he should also have another cautery over the back if it is needed, two if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved as before described.
of the bones When the bones are cold and moist, and cannot conceive, and the flowers (buds?) are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should be cauterized around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and another two cauteries over the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the place of dislocation wet, then you must cauterize the dislocation on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make 3 cauteries of olive oil large enough to fit the wound; and let the cautery be as deep as the wound, and heal it until it is better.
of hip pain When pain occurs in the hip socket, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the treatment we have described does not help, and the ailment is old: then you must purge the ailment of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills alike.
Afterward, he does cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, among which one is such that you cauterize on the hip socket three triangular cauteries according to this form, and you make a good depth and a large one, and there is between each cautery a space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier regarding the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And it is the manner in which one does sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then he cauterizes where the pain holds him, three cauteries there where the ailment says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle of the fourth toes, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the ailment feels that the pain extends to the big toe or near it, then he is cauterized there where he feels the pain, three points or four at the cautery which is called "points."
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels that the pain is under the knee toward the thigh, use a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery in place so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. Afterwards he died from a bellyache.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery on one and the other according to this method. // And they said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the method: make 1 such iron and let it be as thick at the head as a little finger, or a bit less, and let it be pierced with holes and spaces between them the distance of a finger's width; and let there be 2 projections on each side, and let them be like knots, and have 1 handle of well-made iron; and this is its form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the bone of the hip that is ill, and turn it onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with 1 cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a poultice from butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Al-Bukhari says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its frightening appearance, and seldom see those who use it; nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by anyone in whom it is used.
of back pain
When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or from impact or from excessive discharge, or from similar appearances of expanded cold matter, none of these indications are suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to apply a cautery on the back, where the pain persists, in three lines marked with ink, and in each line .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "pin"; and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the cautery key tool according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of salt according to this form.
So that the cautery purples each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a cautery point .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to each other. After curing the site until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in gangliness which is in spasm of a nerve.
There are two types of cautery: one is by fire and the other is by salt. The salt cautery is better; it does not burn the flesh or the bone or the nerve, but is a great remedy for pains that come from the head.
When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that has spread throughout the body's limbs, and when the pain is in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is caused by a cold and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cautery in the following way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need for you to apply cautery on the side of the foot, make a small dot with cautery. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make cautery marks on each knee, 3 or 4 cauteries in each place, all olive-shaped; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand against it for longer than until the skin is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer cautery as we have said in that chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make marks around the wrist for 2 lines; and if there is no more pain in the arms, make marks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give medicine. For if you take good care of him and cleanse his blood, he will be healed with God's help.
from the root of the syphilis
When rot occurs in the armpit and the bowels descend into the groin, as is often the case with new injuries, one should not eat on the day of treatment. Instead, one should consume food that loosens the belly so that the feces will exit the body; then, make the patient sit up with his back against your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relieved and return to their proper position. Take the fire cautery and brand its shape onto the skin above the armpit joint on the bone of the arm, marking a sign that resembles half of a circle on the upper body; then heat up the cautery instrument:
until it is white and dripping with pus. Then reset the bowels to their proper position; and the minister should hold his hand over the patient so they do not return to their previous state; and treat the thighs of the patient, and place a pillow under his thighs, and another servant on top of the thighs, and yet another on the buttocks, holding his hands down. Then apply the cautery onto the sign all along your hand, keeping it straight and firm until you reach the bone. If you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat the process again until you reach the bone; be very careful that the bowels do not protrude when applying the cautery, so as not to burn the patient, or cause other harm, or even death.
And you should know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts will be in vain. The cautery for children should be delicate according to their size, and the same for adults, proportional to their size; after three days, treat the area around the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; then treat it with other ointments until it is fully healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound can close properly; and one should be careful not to move too much, so that the bowels do not protrude when moving around.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great fullness of drinking and eating, and from talking too much; and when he does this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will say hereafter about the cure of cutting in his scrotum. of the rupture in the abdomen
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, do to him .1 cautery of the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it burn the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with a cautery with 3 angles according to this form:
but first sign the location of the anus and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another from below, and hold your hand in between throughout the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and easier.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then cauterization is needed with a cautery called 'needle', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its tortuosity and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom: one must change the cautery on the limb that is nearest to it, so you should continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of miasma
Miasmas are sometimes cleared with a cautery for great aid, and so are diseases that come from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither subsides nor remains, and you doubt that corruption might spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and 1 behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cauterize on the mole according to what it is in front.
And if the ulcer is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly losing ground, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, five cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the croup and another smaller one, two cauteries on the two shoulders; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them. Sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you do, the more help it will bring, and the patient will feel no pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already rotted away. And the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; make the cautery somewhat deep in the thickness of the skin. Then treat with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit point of a nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
of alder trees
When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a somewhat deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat with a poultice made from equal parts of flax seed, lentils, rosemary oil, and a mixture of colon blood and almond blood; bind it with a cloth and keep it in place until it heals.
the treatment of sores by cauterization
When a chancre comes at the beginning and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen more than once; and it is a more certain thing to be cauterized around the edge, using a cautery called "circle," as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot subside
When someone has a disease called  "adubelati," and it is slow to heal, either due to the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or due to the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery tool from which comes the form:
And put your hand over the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it throughout in such a way that the course of the pustule is relieved. After the healing is complete, then cure it.
the fire cure by iron
Another kind of disease is called  "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a melting of the flesh, for it melts the limbs just as fire dries up withered lines. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery, then heat the cauteries very small and large, depending on what is suitable for the affected area; then cauterize all over until you reach all the way to the corruption, removing all of it so that nothing corrupted remains. Then leave it for 3 days and apply a poultice made with oil onto the cauterized areas until the fire burns are healed and all the corruption is gone. After 3 days, if new flesh has grown, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the affected areas. This melting disease can sometimes be cured by medication instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is generally more effective. I have already described the cure for medication in the section on "Medicine for Ulcers": refer to it when needed.
of sores that come on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet by default a disease called "clos" according to our intention arises, and is a large faulty tumor that blisters the foot. And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods: fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as much as a feather, as it is a pen of a quill, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can touch the claw from all sides, and it has thin edges; after that, put it all hot on the claw, and turn your hand all around the claw until it reaches the bottom of the claw; and let it be thus for three days until it begins to exude pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice all night, and the claw will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment impregnating charcoal until it is healed.
And if they are converted by default throughout the body, and many times in the hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take a rod of copper or iron, or a quill pen, and put it on the claw and the wart, that is to say, warts; and place the rod so that it porridges all around, then put a little bowl of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the claw, and can find the hot water a deep path to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. So do one after another, until you extract all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate charcoal.
the cure for trembling
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or any other cause, you should make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery on the foot, and one over the stomach with the olive-wood cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear as sore pustules or stinking pustules due to putrid matter. You should cauterize them at the beginning with a thin stick of myrtle that has been heated, or with a long piece of aristolochia, or with a lentil-shaped cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized as soon as they appear, according to this method; thus the superfluous matter from which they come is disrupted and destroyed, and they are healed. But this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times great flows of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to light, or at the incision of an abscess, or on the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And yet, when this happens to someone, you must quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tightly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger and no drop flows out; then take several small and large olive-wood cauteries and heat them until they are all red; then take either a large or small piece of wool according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is staunched.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful not to hurt the nerve that is nearby, and no other harm should come to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be staunched well by itself if the artery is large, except by one of four methods that we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stanch blood; and it should be bound and pressed firmly.
Whoever administers a tight bandage or places burning objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
And if this happens to someone and there is no mirror or medicine available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and tightly apply pressure above the wound and vein; and they should not move it but moisten it with cold water frequently so that the blood becomes cold and congealed and tightly applied; and make inquiries in advance about what is needed for cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicine, and the causes and the instruments and the forms of cauterizations; and I will go through this chapter by the same path so that one may more easily find what they desire.
And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to attempt this foolishly. For many types of people come for treatment: some are so desperate because of their illness that they quickly change due to the novelty of their condition, and because of the seriousness of their illness; and one must fear such people. And among these there are those who give you their trust and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not listen to such people foolishly, but place more confidence in your honor than in your desire, and do not act rashly but wisely from what you know for certain, and from what you can earn and gain; and use prognostication and indication in treating illnesses where salvation is directed; and this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and a legacy of praise.Car il n’est rien si granz que li homes ne fassent en cest monde de la medicine, qui soit tant grant chose que la medicine elle mesme. Car il a beausseins et bontés si grans qu’il est miracle de les conaistre; et ne doit on mie de cela merveilleer, car nature est miracleuse.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have outlined this chapter for you in discussing chapter chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from other reasons unknown to us.
I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in several parts.
I saw a child whose head was swollen with fluid, and the swelling increased every day until he could no longer support it; he died from the pressure of the fluid which had accumulated under the bone between the brain and skull, between the brain and bone. If the fluid is located there between the brain and bone, and if the abscess is small, split the head with a wide incision as long as two fingers so that the fluid can flow out; and here is how you should treat hydrocephalus:
If the fluid is deeper and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the fluid is under the bone, and you see the creases of the head opening in each part, and the fluid leaks out when you press it with your hand from within, and this has not helped: then you should split the head into four parts according to this method:
And after the incision, remove all moisture with force. After that, open up the folds of cloth and powder, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as will remove moisture from the member until it is healed and comfortable.
And another way to make an incision is to observe where the abscess is largest and the gathering of pus is most concentrated; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
So cut where the abscess is open and the pus gathers, and cut according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, or blood will flow and the patient will die from blood loss and moisture evacuation.
from gout
When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them open, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area around the eyes with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the patient's neck with all your might using a .1.-inch-wide bandage; then look where the vein bleeds, and the points are after the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the points inside, then cut both of them with an acute spatula about two parts deep so that the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
And if you see that, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting through as well about two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space of three digits, then cut down and slit to the bone; and the amount of blood to be let out is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains over the bone without any pus, so that no hot abscess comes, then extract the wound and ligate, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
of the emetic
When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from the tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back his hair from his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little relaxed by pressure in some men who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, he stretches his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and washes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues underneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cover that part according to the quantity of the two bones. For if it is not covered, the blood will not stop flowing everywhere.
And draw out the blood from the 16th part up to the 3rd; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and bleeding comes gradually; then cover the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery up to the bone until the bones are cut; and this is the main treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
For cauterization helps to dry up moistures, therefore it is of greater help for moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts it on top of well-made tents; and when they are removed, it is cured with dry medicines that cause the formation of scar tissue, and with tenting, until it is healed; and if there is a break in the artery during as much as you work on it, then hurry to cover it by cauterization, or you employ vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you don't have that at hand, then put your finger over the spot so that the blood congeals, and moisten the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and then bind it as tightly as it should be; and what is better and lighter for the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 16 parts, but the cutter must be quite thick so that its heat lasts longer. For when the strumenti is too thin, it holds its heat less well. And you should have between the two knives a thickness of one digit, and then when you have made the incision in both places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and the two heads should be separated because they are not soldered together by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When tears are flowing from the eyes that are on top of the forehead, and there is no benefit from medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel pulse movement as if from trembling; and when the eyelids are thin and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen off, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancients called it "cure contused", and you should treat a patient with this condition by shaving the hair from their forehead, then making .iii. incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; let one of the incisions be as wide as two fingers, running straight down through the middle of the forehead to the bridge of the nose, and the other two at either side, above the eyebrows, taking care not to cut into the arteries which are located at either side, above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the jawbone, and let each incision be as wide as three fingers across.
From the incision at the temple to the second incision; and scorch all of the skin between the .ii. incisions to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second incision, then remove this plaster.
Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "culter", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, and it is shaped thus: And cut the incision towards the chest and the armpit, and the lower part towards the bone, and bind it tightly until it reaches the middle split. And tie up all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the opening of the chest, and then make another incision in the middle split until the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the area for the extracted blood; then put a tent made of old cotton in each split, and place moistened cloths in wine, oil, and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming to it; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large amount of warm water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
from the eyes
When someone has a constant and habitual catarrh, and you see that the eyes are pale and sunken, and the vision is weakened, and there is pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then you may know from these signs that those matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but from many veins, and that it comes from the brain, and its cure lies therein.
And you should command the patient to lean back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on top. i. poc. And start from the left temple incision to the right temple, and cut up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move when eating; and once the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton between the two lips of the incision and cover it with linen bandages; then apply wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote healing.
In the same way: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice out of it; and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
of the treatment of ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or animals, or stones, or similar objects such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water and garlic and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether a stone or something else that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, then expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then drop some oil of violets or oil of sisamen onto it, and then perform an extraction; and have the patient sneeze with a nostrum, plug the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear elevated. Often this treatment will work; and if not, then perform an extraction using fine tweezers, for which see the following form:
If it pops out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then perform an extraction using a small, thin needle of soft metal; and if it does not pop out in this way, make a brass hook and insert its tip firmly into the ear canal, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull outward firmly, for often it will come out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some glue and attach a bird to it, and place some instrument designed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull outward. And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that an abscess forms there, and a spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient fast for three days, and draw blood according to his condition, then have him sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the slit should be shaped like a moon, so that you reach the stone, then extract it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until he is healed. And if it is a grain that is in and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatule, held subtle according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then pull it out with subtle tweezers and with a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the acute case that the earache goes to the ears, the patient should use the first remedy, and open the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on his back with the affected ear upwards. If the earache jumps out through the air, that's good. If not, take several small stones according to the size of your finger, heat them in the fire; then put one end of the stone into the ear, and press the other end with your finger, and make a fire with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this from stone to stone until all the ache is driven out, as we have said in the case of the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small body like a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that one can feel, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and tract on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, then pull them out with fine tweezers, and if none appear, then take the quill of a goose feather and pierce the eardrum.
It is narrow underneath and wide above. And push in the thinnest end of the quill into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient; then suck firmly on the quill; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, then stop up the quill with cotton as I have said regarding stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distill your oils and remedies into the ear through this instrument, so that the quill is the source of the remedy as you see:
And it is made of silver or brass with a small hole underneath and holes above for distilling; and to press the distillate into the instrument with a well-made brass instrument for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the blade; then pour your oil or juice and any remedies you wish into the quill, and the quill is in the ear; then place the razor over the cotton and press your hand gently so that the remedy is distilled onto the eardrum; and the patient feels it inside, and the distillation is a little warm from the fire so that it is not too cold when it enters the ear; and guard against it being too hot, for the remedy would not be as effective.
of the ear stoppers
No child is born without an opening in their ears; and the same thing happens to men due to a wound or a growth within the ear, and sometimes this stopper occurs deep within the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a slight displacement of the opening, which can be easily seen.
Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a difficult condition in many ways, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane visible, then observe how the stopper forms.
And it should be sharp and pointed at the front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to a growth or the body of the ear, then grip it with тонé pins, and gently peel it away until all the growth is removed.
And if the growth is embedded in the ear, take a fine, light razor, heat it slightly in the fire, and apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the growth, which causes great pain to the patient when he hears, pierce gently, and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is healed; then take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder over powdered vitriol; and if you see any swelling in the ear, you should draw out the tent and replace it with another tent moistened with cerate made from olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear; and use other treatments that stop the bleeding from the distilling veins.
of paper charcoal
This poultice comes from plants when they are moist and dry; you should spread it with tweezers and tongs, and the root of a spathe; then put powdered vitriol on top.
And if there is no scurf, cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision heals; and many times they return, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come as poultices from plants that look like hail in their shape and hardness, and this disease is therefore called 'hail', and it is an assembly of thick moisture in the paper above and below; its work is such: take care if the hailstone breaks from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; then open it with tweezers, and peel it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient; and if the split is large, they put in a stitch, and heal it until it is clean; and if it is small, they do not force it, for the ointment will restore and heal it at once.
And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and grasp the hailstone with tweezers and squeeze from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, wash the eye with salted water, and clean the area of any pus until the patient is healed.
of the fat around the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is woven into the membranes above the paper, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it affects their eyes greatly; and they have cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes. And so they lie on their faces again and sleep with their eyelids closed, and the moisture and appearance of the eye cover the exinach, which becomes visible through the eye. And when you press on the area with your fingers, the exinach comes out between them.
And the method of the treatment is that the patient places his head on your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach in each part, and then place it over the eye; and press with your fingers from both sides so that the exinach gathers within the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a spatulum, making the incision no larger than the wound made for vein opening; and in various cases, the exinach comes out through the incision, depending on its shape like a piece of white fat.
So take a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and move your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the fissure, or you will reach all the way to the eye and blister it.
And if the excrescence opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently widen the fissure slightly so that it appears; then pull as we have said, and moisten clothes in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and apply bandages tightly.
And if there are such people who grind and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat it until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes in that place, then treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.Et si li maux est de la chair qui est mortifiee par cause de l’huile ou par cause d’autrui mal, si covient le faire saigner, et mettre sus emplaustre assouajant; puis la faire boire vin chaud, et donner l’alume, et garder que li sang ne soit trop fort.
of the hair of papers
When hairs grow from papers, uneven and different from their natural state, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the papers, and white film, leading to destruction of the eyes; there are four ways to treat this: through cauterization with fire, or with a medicine applied directly to the eye, or through incision and stitching, or with canes, depending on what I will describe.
You should place the patient's eye in your dominant hand, then turn the eyelid to the left; if it returns to its original position, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle and thread through the eyelid, close to the edge of the discolored area where the uneven hairs are growing, and run the thread over the entire eyelid. Then, with a scalpel, make an incision under the eyelid, along the uneven hairs, from the large tear duct to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small piece of cotton and cloth under the eyelid. Mark a figure eight on the eyelid, like the shape of a myrrh roll, but the shape should correspond to the amount you see the eyelid raising or distorting.
And if there is a need to cut out a large portion of the eyelid, do so according to how much the eyelid has softened; then make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the large tear duct and ending at the small one. Make one cut close to the natural hairs in the shape of a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, and pull it through; then remove the skin entirely. Bring the two edges of the wound together with a single thread and a fine needle, and absorb any blood, then use something sticky to tighten the excess thread above the two eyebrows; if not, don't worry about it. Leave the stitch and threads in place for three or four days, then remove them and treat the wound with dry, compressing remedies without stitches. The eyelid will heal on its own (as the ancients say), and this is a safe procedure.
and if in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, at 3 inches apart according to the form which is here:
then cut out those on top with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
And if you don't have the strength to hold the tweezers, and it is not even, then take a needle with which he has .1. string, and pierce through the figure; and pierce another string through the large artery, and the second string through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the strings evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above which you have marked, as we have told, then bring together the 2 lips of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is cured; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerot
and sometimes the hair of the paper is turned around: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the suturing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of warts is as follows: you must first turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two warts using art, and two thin lines as long and wide as the spatumile; then tie two knots at both ends where you hold the threads; then bring one knot close to the other gently above the paper on the eye, and pull the two warts from their roots; leave them like that for a few days, and the skin that was pulled will die and harden and fall off as it shrinks.
If it takes a long time and the skin is pulled too tightly, then treat it until it heals; and when the wound has healed and the paper has fallen off, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two warts that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the tools are such that you thread a thin needle with a fine silk thread, then tie the ends together gently and make the length of the threads about a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the spatumile, and tie the end of this thread as well; then put the patient's head in your lap, and let them face the sun so that their skin is exposed, for it is a delicate treatment; then thread the needle all the way into the root of the hair close to the skin until you draw it out through the paper with the natural hair; then pull the hair all the way up to the spatumile, and insert the hair into the spatumile along with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the hunt underneath to the very end that you have ordered, until the hunt comes out of the hole above and you see it through the vision of the eye; then you will treat the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the horses' mane, and let it grow with that which you leave, until it is elongated and then release it.
of the eyelash
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the eyelash comes, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly from an injury, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the natural way is when the eyelash comes out through the wound in the eye, or from cutting or cautery, and one should treat it so that it does not break. And the method of treatment is that you split the wound, loosen its edges, and put in there tents of linen, and ligature it until it is healed; and one must not use in its treatment things that dry and restrict. For if you do that, the disease will become worse than before; but work with moisturising things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or vinegar and seed of linseed are cooked, and ointments of diaquilon melted in some oils, and wrap it up with a tent, and treat it thus.
And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not fuse according to the shape it was before; and these works that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the shape it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease, which is truly called "axacrati", has both natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wounds, incisions, cautery, and similar things; and the way to treat it is as follows: you take a needle with a double thread, pierce the flesh at the outer corner of the left eye so that the thread passes through to the right side, making sure the thread lies above the needle. Then the flesh above the needle is pressed down, and the cut is made wide enough for a spatula.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, turn the paper, and make 2 slits along the sides inside the paper; the ends of the 2 slits on each side of the incision you have made should form angles so that when they are brought together, the shape is like the shape of the letter "J". Then remove the paper, according to the quantity that its edges are cut under, from what follows the paper; then bring the two severed parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines, and with bandages, until it is healed.
If the illness comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then one must make a clean split underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is stated above; then unravel between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his might, so that the figure returns to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
suddenly from the paper
When this suddenness happens to human beings in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one must therefore push the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and hold it with tweezers, so as to grasp what is cut in the subtle spatula, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not feel that the spatula is too sharp or cutting into the eye; and make your incision, by which you peel away this membrane, very lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and when all of this membrane has been removed, there may sometimes be a sore in the eye, and it should be washed with warm water and then with cool water, and then a tent of linen should be placed between the paper and the eye, and lamb's wool dampened in egg white should be laid over the eye; and after the third day, one should use collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
Know that there are two types of ulcer: one is nervous and resembles a hard ulcer, and the other is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched with iron and pinched, it feels like paneling to the fingernails, but no one can feel it. Both types begin at the outer corner of the eye, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye, obscure its light, and impair its movement.
And the method of incision is to have the patient place his head against your hand, then work the eyelids; and hold the paper in your hand, then pinch the edge of the ulcer with tiny pincers and stretch it upward; next take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair through it, and double over the point of the needle slightly before inserting it into the ulcer, and tie the ulcer with a thread and stretch it upward, then scrape along the edge of the ulcer from its base toward the eyebrow until you reach the tear gland, using tiny movements and leaving the natural flesh of the tear gland untouched, so that the incision does not affect the flow of tears; sometimes only the edge of the ulcer needs to be tied, as we have said, with thread, then scrape along the spatumile:
And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy membrane and rupture it, and that the tear gland is not pierced; after the incision, drop a little powdered chalk into the eye, and make a collar out of litarge, leaving it in place until the next day; then treat the eye as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatule lightly poked according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not lessened and the reason is pressing, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper ore, ground together, and stop the eye until the next day; then start the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely removed.
If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work again as before, until it is healed.Si li ungle est ost, adonques tu le remets, et si li est alongie, adonques tu le rompts; car il ne poait demorer a son leu.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the arm hurts the eye greatly through great harm, then suspend it at the elbow, and cut off a part and not all, so that the body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge.
of the flesh which grows above the pupil
In the eyes of some men sometimes grows red flesh, and covers the pupil and turns upwards, and resembles a rose of marble; and the action is that the patient puts his head in yours, then he works on the eye, and pulls all that flesh to the hinges suitable for this, and holds it firmly; then cut the first flesh, and go cutting little by little to the end, and be careful not to bleed the eye during the operation; and the incision of the spatumile which we have described in the incision of the nail, and with small forces from which one removes the pus, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates it;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply to the eye oil of seal, or you can distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton bandage with egg white so that it is secured from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left, and the pain increases, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your operation until it is healed, and thus do when the flesh is grown in the eye through this likeness.
But nevertheless you should ease the treatment of every weak part of the natural way; and in accidental work with iron, do not put your hand into any of those works until you see that this member can bear such work.
of the veins of them
Such are red veins which are covered above the eye, and tolerate their work and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first, you must look at the eye, in which such is, is outside, and there is no other disease except the evil; then he should be treated in this way: instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then gently compress those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the compresses be double according to this shape:
And let two compresses be in degrees in .i. body according to this form:
then you can squeeze these veins gently, and let the blood flow out an hour after another, until you see the veins recede from the eye; and be careful not to cut the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not slip outside these veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red color to corrupt what is left of the scabies.
And if you do not have the power to squeeze all of this in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and there is a hot abscess, then begin again according to what is written above until he is healed; and this is the way of doing it:
of eye fistula
Examine the fistula, which is called "arissati" in Latin: when you cure it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have written before, and it is not healed, then there is a wound in it where you should cut into the abscess, the place where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the decay and blackness; there is the instrument of which this is the form; it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron into a flat head, and punctured like a file as it is in its current form:
And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know the decay has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with astringent medicines.
if the site is sewn up and a boil grows there, and the body of the bow is sewn up and remains that way for 40 days, and it does not heal and no bad accident occurs, you can know that it is healed; if not, then do nothing but draw out the fistula through the hole in the bone according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with watery medicines, and when it is uncovered take a needle according to this form, and let the head of the needle be flat on three sides, and the shaft tapered to a point as you see here:
then place it on the bone under the ulcer, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the needle around until it pierces the bone and he feels the pain due to the wound from his hand; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the boil grows and hardens the site, go to the nail; this is easier for the patient.
of the exit of the eye
When the eyes open fully and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you must ligate the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or a cupping glass without piercing to draw out any fluid; then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla over the eye, and then compress it with bandages and cloth. The manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloth, double each one over four times, and then place one over another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then compress it firmly from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the leeches to draw without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the ligature becomes soft, you must compress it tightly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the ointment and the bandages and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
from a torn woven fabric
When disruptions occur in woven fabric, then it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce an needle in the root of the part below up to the part above; and then pierce another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the armhole; and tie the fabric around the eye, and compress it well, then remove the needle and place a soft egg-soaked cloth over the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the fabric, then cleanse the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric in a circle of cloth all around, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great indication, then pierce them with a sharp spatulate instrument which enters through the eye socket, and scrape away the white moisture and bring the eyes down, and enter inside immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
from the socket of the eye
This disease, which is called "alkunati", is nothing but water accumulated in the eye socket, resembling a descent of water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the operation is that you make the patient sit on a raised seat or chair, then hold the head between your hands, tilting it so that you see the water come out from under the eyelids. Then it should be wiped away, and the light shone into the eye to check the patient can see as before; if not, know it is water, and if the discharge from the eye socket does not appear as described, then tilt the patient's head again and use a sharp spatulate instrument to press on the conjunctiva next to the cornea and the cornea itself until the water comes out. Then instil into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled with honey; then it should be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
of the eye waters
We have the appearance of the diseases in the division, and what should be done to pierce it; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so as not to see the sun, and close his healthy eye and squeeze it tightly; then place the paper over the eye if the eyes are on the left, or on the right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to the part where the tear duct is, then gently insert the instrument called 'almagda' and turn your hand so that it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that the almgada reaches the empty space; and the measure of the path of the almgada should be at the bottom of the measurement of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; you will then see the bone in this paper through the clarity of the horny tissue, then place the instrument where the ailment is, then express it from under one path after another. If the fluid flows out now, the patient will see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the fluid rises up the second path, insert the instrument and when it is stuck in and not rising, gently pull out the almgada by turning your hand a little; then put in the eye a little seal gem, and take it out of this eye. Then place on top of the eye a compress of linen soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg white, and bind it with the healthy eye. We and those of our time put on a mixture of comfrey with plenty of egg white.
And if the almgada cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called 'albarit', which has this form:
And therefore pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deeply, but make a small incision, then fill it with alum, as we have said; and when the work is finished, prepare for the patient a dark room in which he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free of all movement, and eat light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and let him be tied according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day; and you should not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten this, so that the water rises quickly.
And if there are hot abscesses, you should untie the eye before the seventh day, and use a remedy for abscesses; and when it is soothed, untie the vision and put on an eyepatch to cover one eye, and let him stay in that dark room. And then go out of the house a little and return to his condition; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iran, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly made of bronze.
And let the heads be of the same subtle metal, and the rear in 3 angles sharp.
of the eye above the nose
Sometimes there are various nosebleeds, from which some seem like scorpions with many feet; and if there are any with a dark blue color, and some with a light blue color. For this type of nosebleed that is light blue and not dark, you should have the patient lean back against the sun; open their nostrils, and pour the liquid onto those nosebleeds, and pull them outwards; then cover what you can sustain with the spatumile's subtle tip from one side, as long as you know that the nosebleed has stopped.
And if anything remains which one cannot cover, then open it at its thinnest and lightest part, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, then lancing as appropriate; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the evil is removed, then apply ice or cold water and wine.
If the ears are affected and moisture reaches to the palate, you know it is cured; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, you know there is purulent matter in the bone above, because the instrument did not cut through: then you must insert a large piece of linen thread, knotted at one end, with the knot at the tip of the nose, leaving a space of a digit or less between each knot; and let the patient hold the thread in his mouth by its tail to the limit of his strength, and draw it up the nostril until it reaches the palate; many children do this in school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it. Then hold one end of the thread in one hand, and the other end which comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and move them gently from side to side while feeling along the thread with your fingers. Do this until you feel that the thread has corroded and removed all the corrupted matter; then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, then reinsert it into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded and removed all that remains of the corruption. Then insert a plug of cotton wool into the nostril for several days while it heals; if medicine is needed to dry out the passage, use it. This is the instrument used to cleanse the nose, through which oils and medicines are instilled.
It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it must also be straight; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be filled for cleansing the nose; and there should be a handle on the instrument to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
of the heart through the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose and grows and becomes large, to such an extent that it is visible to the eye; therefore one should cut it at the beginning and remove the whole pustule, then place on the fire cautery or burning medicine; but if one delays cutting it until it has become large, take care whether it is hard, discolored in color, and of poor sensation: then do not touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess; because when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to pressure rather than discoloration, and you see that one can cover it all, empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
when the nose has been cut and sewn up
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these cartilage channels, it benefits few men. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then cut off the .ij. lips at one stitch, then cure it until it heals; and if the lips are torn on both sides, you should scrape away all the parts of their skin until they heal, then sew together the .ij. lips at one stitch, press them together, and powder with powdered dragon's blood, and powdered incense; and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster on top of the powders, and leave it until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have already informed you.
of abscesses on the lips
In the hollows of the lips there are hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, small and large; therefore you must split the lips, and cut into each pustule with pincers, and scrape away the pus from every part; then apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is dried up; then use raw garlic, and clean the area of any dried matter until it is healed.
of gum swelling
Many times a tooth grows on the gums, which the elders call «albulus»; one should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, and let the blood or puss flow; then place powdered vitriol or other binding and dessicating powders over the site; and if that tooth comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, then cut it again and cauterize it: if it does not come back after cauterization, then it will not return. These are the forms of treatment for teeth.
of the eyes
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, as far as the corruption extends to the gum, and the teeth stink; so one should have the patient hold his head steady with his jaw in your lap, and you should pick at the teeth or growths that are visible, until nothing remains; and thus you should do with the blackness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are all cleaned out; and if it is removed on the first attempt, that is good; if not, then one must repeat the procedure again the next day or the third, until everything is cleaned out; and know that teeth require diverse forms of tools for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the pick used to clean between the teeth has different forms from those used to clean the teeth themselves; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
When you cure a tooth of its pain, you should hurry to pull it out as far as you can, because one must not delay in doing so; for there is no excuse for not pulling it out. Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw breath, you must be certain of the tooth that hurts. Many times, the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe it is in the good tooth, and they have the healthy tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not go away through this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already seen this happen to these patients. And when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all around to the gum; then open your mouth wide to push back the gums on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers, little by little, until it is well loosened; then grip tightly with the tweezers. And the head of the patient should be held firmly between your knees so that it does not move.
Then pull the tooth straight out without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with cotton, where the rottenness is; and grip it gently with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled out; and you must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining. And be aware that you do not do as the ignorant healers do, who sometimes break the tooth while pulling it out because of their haste and force; they do not pay attention to what we have just described, and sometimes bring about a serious illness due to the roots left behind, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. After the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine, or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of forceps, which are silent in the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so they do not double when you pull the tooth. And these are the shapes:
And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made of iron, and they should be toothed to hold the roots.
of the root of teeth When the root remains when pulling, you should put wet cotton on the spot for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then use forceps called "algefri", which make the gums look like a sow's mouth; they should be made inside as well as a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is made of ivory, thus its form:
It should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come later:
And one should also use this instrument with .ij. tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
and other tools which are before in the reason of teeth, and with this instrument that resembles a large pair of tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are some diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break from the carriage or other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, of which here is the form: And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then he should treat it with this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature and its shape is ugly, especially in virgins, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or polished; then pull it out; and if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the form, and it is like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened at the end:
And pull it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file like this:
and it is like the lime that needles are made from; and with the lime, lightly prick the tooth little by little, so that it does not move until it chips; then smooth it at the end with a file completely, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites into the tongue, then file down the sharpness so that it neither bites nor corrupts speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front teeth loosen, either through concussion or biting down, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines to no avail; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. Then, if you wish to direct the teeth, take the wire and loop it twice between two healthy teeth; then place the ends between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, as far as you can reach without bleeding. Then return to the starting point and gently pull your hand upwards so that nothing moves, and ensure that the wire is pressed against the tooth root so it cannot escape. Then twist the wire ends with pliers, bring them together, and place them between the healthy teeth so they do not bite into the tongue. Leave it tightly in place as long as it will stay, and if it comes undone or the wires break, then restrain it with another wire. It will remain this way all his life, and this is the shape of the teeth and how to adjust the two healthy teeth:
And when a tooth chips, if it is put back in its place, freshly and as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth out of cow's bone, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cover the vein of the tongue
At times this vein, which comes from under the tongue, is natural and present since birth; sometimes it occurs due to a wound. The treatment is as follows: open the mouth of the patient, place their head in your lap, and lift the tongue. Then cover the nervous vein broadly so that the tongue is dislodged from its position. If there is hardening or a lump due to a wound, insert the claw and cover the vein broadly; be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery underneath. Once you are done, apply aqua rosa or aqua frigida, and then place a tent made of linen under the tongue. Apply theriac to the patient every night so that the vein does not heal and become joined again. If there is any bleeding, apply ground vitriol; if the bleeding persists, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
And if you see it discolored to a dusky or black color, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is a ulcer. If it is declining towards a phlegmon and there is moisture, insert the claw and open it with a spatulum, releasing it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your action, apply ground vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment, continuing until you have removed everything. Afterwards, apply aqua rosa and aqua silice, and treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
of abscesses in the throat
There are sometimes growths in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as we have described in the section on tonsillitis, and they do not heal, pay attention: if they are small, hard abscesses with a yellowish color, do not touch them with iron. And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron either, so that blood can flow; but let it be until it heals, then you will split it open, or it will burst on its own. If it is white and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for cauterization, but first check to see if the abscess has cooled down and is calm. Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your lap, with his mouth open and the servant gripping his hands tightly, and press the tongue down under the entire instrument, which should be made of silver or thin bronze like a knife.
While pressing the tongue with this instrument, you will see the abscess. Take a pair of tweezers and grab it, then pull it up into the tonsil and out from the top as hard as you can; pull some of the threads along with it, then cover the instrument with a cloth, which is part of its shape, so that it looks like a fork. The prongs are curved, one facing one way and the other facing the opposite way, and they are very sharp, made from iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument available, use a pair of tongs with the same shape:
And it has a sharp edge on one side and a flat edge on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them then just as the two tonsils are cut.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat; it was specifically one small abscess. Her throat was almost completely closed, so the woman could not breathe through the passageway that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within a day or two. The abscess had grown so much that it had pushed out two of her tonsils. I quickly inserted an awl into one of the openings of the tonsils, then pulled it towards me, removing a large amount of pus; I then did the same on the other side, opening up her mouth and pressing her tongue. Afterwards, I inserted the awl into the abscess and cut out a portion of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway in her throat was opened, and she began to drink water and wine. I continued to cut into the abscess for a long time, and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large. So, I packed it with medicine and cauterized it inside her throat; in this way, it stopped growing. I left those parts, and she remained under the care of God after me.
from the grape
When the eye descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is thick and round, it is called an 'eye'. When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pain of the throat has subsided, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red, or dark red, or black, then you should make an incision. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, from its whiteness and length, let the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and pull it down, and cauterize it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds. You must not cauterize more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit, because if you cauterize too much, it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it heals. And if the patient fears the cautery, then you should use a sedative for the cautery without fear. The manner of the cautery is as follows: the patient puts his head down, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is applied with live coals so that it is not too thick or too thin; and with this instrument, which has this shape,
and has a handle on the top where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and one places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucous flow from his mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat and cause bleeding; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see it becoming numb and the bites of the medicine calm down; and if you see [this], take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the eye with the cotton on top, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to repeat the cautery of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use rosewater, and cure it with gargles until it heals.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put garlic in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and in the pot there is one instrument with a handle according to this manner: And it can be of silver or bronze, and the patient's head is pushed into the mouth so that the vapour rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; then do this often until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the hot abscess, for many things can happen; nor should this be done after the hot abscess has subsided. And if this instrument is not available, take a tube and put an egg yolk inside it, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the egg yolk does not let the vapour harm the mouth, and this is a good remedy altogether.
Often a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, becomes stuck in the throat; therefore you must try to pull it out as far as you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can feel the object moving; and if it does not come loose and remains stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or let the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel-wool, or a lettuce root, or a dry crumb of bread; and tie a string to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take a leaden instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at one end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the upper part lifted up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest you harm it, nor push the bone in; and move the patient's head so that he vomits, in order for the object to come out; then let him swallow the instrument again, or pull it out with the instrument, equally, until it is out.
of the blood of the throat
When the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of remedies, and if this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers suitable for this. And if this doesn't work, take a thin, curved needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the needle, and do this frequently. And if the patient is suffering from a cold all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving it around with his hand frequently; and as soon as the blood meets the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida using the instrument I described for smoking out the throat; do this many times, for it will work without delay. And the way to smoke it is to put burning charcoal in a pot, and cover the pot with a perforated lid, and insert the tip of the instrument into the hole; then blow your smoke into the pot, and have the patient put the end of the needle in his mouth, close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes to the blood; and the blood will stop now, and if it does not, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and sour things, and drink no water; and then he will surely urinate.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the throat looks like bent tongs so as to be able to enter the throat; it resembles a bird's beak and has roughness from sandpaper so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; see the shape:
the chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the following recollections come from here and there in this book; and they differ in penetration and size. And they come in two ways: one is in its appearance itself, and the other is where they are located in the body. For example, an abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and an abscess in fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs in joints; each requires a different treatment.
And if there is an abscess that one must not pierce until the boil is ripe according to its maturity; and there are some that one must pierce when they become crusty without waiting for their maturity, as with abscesses near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, and you leave them until they are purulent around the joint, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted due to the pressure, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal organ, and you delay piercing it until it is mature; it will harm the principal organ. But one must not pierce an abscess with a crust without digestion being complete, except for the one near the fundament, which may become elongated inside and cause a fistula; it will not heal quickly.
And you must know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its maturity, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and let the piercing be deep in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
In places that fold, according to the part of the body. And when abscesses are in fleshy places, it is good that you leave the piercing until there is complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them too early, they will discharge poison throughout the body, and they fill with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths will harden. And one must treat small abscesses with small holes, and large abscesses with large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and in some abscesses one must cut out the core, and cover them when they have become as soft as a pad, and are dead, as one does with blisters. And there are some that split into three angles, and some which are covered like the leaf of a bay tree, as with abscesses of the veins; and there are some on which one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those which have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce directly; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but some part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this several times until all the pus comes out. Do this especially when the patient is weak in strength, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old person. For sometimes the patient will jump with the discharge of pus and die without you realizing it. Therefore be very careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and if the wound of the abscess is small, then dress it with linen tenting; and if it is a large abscess with many holes, then insert a tent into each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut into the skin and removed some, then fill it up with old cotton or rag without moisture, and leave it for three days, then remove it and dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs due to your work, apply cold water and ease, and moisten a cloth, placing it over the bleeding area many times. If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and use the powders I have described earlier in this book. If it is winter, and the abscess is very nervous, you should place tents and moistened cloths in warm wine and oil over it; if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, you should place moistened cloths in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said. Then open the abscess, wash and care for it, as it should be, until it heals.
And now you should know generally about the treatment of abscesses. I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and you have the chapter here.
of sores
Or, when the head comes from small abscesses, and they are handled like those in woven cloth, as is the jaw of a young girl, and there are many varieties of them. There are some that are fatty and some that are piercing in shape, and there is no doubt if the artery doesn't act contrary. And the treatment for the neck is to examine it with all possible instruments called "endoscopers", from which the form comes afterwards, indicating what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then pierce it from above. And when the moisture has been discharged, then scorch it without leaving any of the skin that contained the moisture, for it will return to being sore if anything is left; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and let it be until the next day; and continue this way for those who are staying overnight. Then on the second and third days, repeat with the cotton as before, as long as you know well that nothing is left overnight; then care for the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess contains a fatty lump, cut it according to its shape; pierce and scrape all around, and put all your treatment into drawing out the lump where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, do as I have told you after. And do the same for an abscess that is hard in texture and shape, curing
And the incision on a stone-like, moist abscess is lighter, because there is little blood in it. And if some of these abscesses are found in the head or where there is no moisture, and there was such an abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had cut into any of them, they would have made a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, the opening should be in the most dependent place all day long so that the pus can drain out; and treat them as it should be done.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and sometimes in other parts of the body, and they are very common, and are intertwined with each other. And each scrophule is properly within its coat, just as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophules. There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and do not respond to treatment. So, when you see one with a good disposition for cutting, and it looks like the color of the body, and it is smooth in each part and is not ulcerated at the nerves of the neck or at the artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and peel it from every side, and the two lips of the wound should be pinched together, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and drain it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut into any nerve or vein, and do not use too much force, so that the hand does not slip, and do not cut too deep.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it will not let you work, then put into the wound powdered vitriol, or some powder that stops bleeding, and bind the wound tightly; and leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound softens, and begins to discharge pus. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you finish it; then examine with your finger if there remains any small scrofula, cut it out and cleanse it. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but ligate it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton saturated in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut out all the scrofula, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scrofula; then it is necessary to attend to stopping the root of it, drawing it out and sewing as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce thus as that one before was said, depending on it, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, cure it with ointment smeared on charcoal, until it is healed.
of scrofula
The ancients spoke of throat surgery, but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words.
For those with scrofula, the flap of flesh in the throat called the "epiglottis" should be cut away; and this is done to help those with an abscess that is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge, il covient que tu fendures la gorge et li pormon dou costé, car il ne peut aler si non.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it underneath three or four small splits, across two circles, or according to the size of the split in the hyoid, but not into the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to cut the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long in between.
And if the teacher is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the end, then cut the cartilage as far as it goes to the cartilage; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the hyoid, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the cartilage that it jumps up due to the place which is broken, and due to the defect in the voice.
and leave the wound open to the air.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up completely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient judged dead, and the lack of breath evident. Therefore, grab the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be saved from death;
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease has passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a damsel take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting through part of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it, and I judged that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything other than through her throat, and the blood was coming out through the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound and healed it until it was cured;
and the lady had no worse than a hoarse voice, and she recovered and returned to her senses;
for this reason, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one shouldn't have fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess colored yellow, and it often occurs in women;
and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural type has no cause.
And the accidents are according to two methods, one of which resembles grease, and the other method resembles an abscess that comes out of our veins; and it has fear, and one should not work with fire except in a small one, and test and search throughout the orifice; if you find it as soft as grease, and it cannot move at all, so grab it, just as one grabs nuts, and pull it to the top of its neck, if there is nothing there; and search thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
of us
There are many ways of doing this, and I will tell you all about them.
Now I must tell you all the difference between a natural birth and a caesarean section.
I say that childbirth is a fever and heat that lasts until the delivery is complete and the placenta is expelled; then the fever and heat subside.
With no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large;
and they are according to their appearances, either dry or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the pustule, that you examine and inquire into it first with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will allow, as described in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of the inquiry into pustules on the head is that you press in the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers a little bit by little bit, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
then remove the instrument, and take care that nothing jumps out.
If pus runs clear, whatever color it has, treat it as I have described for other abscesses:
and if after the instrument no pus comes out, know that it is fat, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it clean with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it clean, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains untouched, he will return many times.
and if he stays a little while and the wound does not trouble him, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and bind it up, and apply healing remedies to the abscess until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then cut the edges of the wound, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth.
and if the wound is bleeding profusely or otherwise behaving contrary to how it should, then hasten and apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound scabs over; then return to using what was previously effective.
Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. And there are three types of probe tips: one is called "albaret", and another is called "breb". There are also three sizes of these probes: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses and fistulas.
They are similar to the needles used for sewing sorcery dolls, made of brass, iron, or silver. The yellow-colored ones are more effective and are often treated with black pitch to probe the curves of fistulas.
They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture.
The shapes of the knives are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small. Some knives have two curves in three ways.
and if they have three curvatures, and are also in three ways; and if they have two curvatures, and only one curvature, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of those that have hooks are cutting, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, which scratch the brain, so that they do not cut the vein or the nerve.
and with these introducers are the leeches applied in many ways so that the patient does not perceive it when opening abscesses.
and they are in three ways: large, small and medium, as you can see.
and don't use it anywhere except in fleshy places, like legs, and arms, and breasts, and in similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a piece of wood, according to this form, with which blood is stanched;
and sometimes it is placed in the place that heals by opening veins and arteries, and sometimes they are bound according to this large form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they seem like a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, must bleed according to this form from b. to .g.: then scrape the fat away, and fill the wound with medicine made from charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and let it heal;
and if the breast sags downward and becomes softened due to its size as it does with women, then make two cuts above, along two similar lines; so that one line holds the other at its end, and the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from b. to g.: then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it absorbs the residue and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those therefore which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in slits for scrofula; and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply cauterization as we have said previously.Et se li apostemes est desoz le col ou desoz les asseles, si covient que il soit fendu a la radice selonc la ligne m. jusc’a la ligne .g., car en cest lieu il conviens que il soit fenduz selonc la ligne de la nature.
on the rot of an artery
When an artery is rotted and the skin above it is sewn together, this often results in abscesses forming. This also happens when there is swelling of a vein and an abscess.
And if one knows it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a constriction. And when it is from the vein, there is a swelling and a appearing of heat.
and it is madness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin and neck and many other places, and is very large. Therefore one should avoid the cautery of iron, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, as well as that which is due to inflammation of the artery, which pierces through the skin of the neck.
Therefore one should avoid the cautery of iron, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, as well as that which is due to inflammation of the artery, which pierces through the skin of the neck. Then cut into the armpit, and carefully separate the artery from the lymph nodes, so that it is exposed.
Then push a needle under the artery and pierce it all the way to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread about six inches long, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
then point to the spot between the two threads of an introducer so that the pus comes out and the abscess is drained;
then apply the ointment in a circular motion, until the thread moves freely; then apply the appropriate ointment, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to an open wound, you should dye the entire area around the wound with the pus, Then take the needle in the hand you are using to hold it and make the incision there, and thread it with a double length of thread so that you can pull it through from the other side; Then ligature the abscess, as I have told you, either with one part of the double thread or with both parts;
And if you are afraid that the thread will slip out, then tie another needle to the single thread all the way under the abscess at the incision of the first needle and pull the threads tight in four places;
Then cut the abscess so that the excess fluid drains out, then cut away the excess fluid from the skin and leave what is tied;
then put on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer tenting treatments and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come in the arteries and veins, they come to the nerves when they are wounded, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often at the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a kind of abscess, and its colour resembles that of the body, and it has various dispositions without pain;
and when it is pulled firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not located throughout the body, but beneath the heart;
and it is mute in all parts, and cannot go forward or backward, nor downward or upward, and that which is in the joints must not be covered with iron; there might be contraction.
and those who are on the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temple. If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, they suspend it from the hook, then scrape it, and the bone and stitch up the wound until it is healed.
large bumps hanging Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to oats, and it has a fine root and the bumps are large; and there are small ones and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had 2 of these in his belly which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were soft and oozing fluid.
I copied and found in one 18 ounces weight, and in the other 6 ounces, and the operations in the incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a fine root;
if the incision is made too wide, and the cautery tools are ready in front of you. For there are often great blood losses when cutting, and if the blood flows out, then hurry with the cauterization;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made piece of plaster and apply it to the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;et se li sans ne vient pas adous, si le contremande a son maistre, qu’il ne te vienne a l’incision, por ce que li sans ne vienne adous, tant come li sans soit contremandé.
and then restrain it and do not stop pressing the plaster on the joint until it is cut through; if the roots are large, they may have fear of cutting it directly through the belly, but you can cut halfway through it,
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cover the thalamus which is of a dusky color and poor sense, and milk-like appearance.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or cut on the syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other routings, or from blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
And if it is through the rupture of the soft tissue and through the opening of the hernia, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with multiple openings. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when one presses it with their hands, it retreats, and then comes back out, and sometimes it is blocked, and increases significantly at the entrance of the bath and with intense effort.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a minor issue, and opens easily when you press it with your hand, and does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to ventosities, then there is swelling on the touch, and the actions are such that you should observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or ventosities. If you should let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the swelling is in the intestines or the belly, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the abdomen; then command him to sit up quickly between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed all around the spasm, and the half of the abscess above the great toe;
then open the half of the abscess that extends above the ligature, and push in your finger, and probe the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligature, then loosen it and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, they take it at the root and cut off the excess;
and if the artery causes contrary results, or the vein, go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and insert the two needles into what you have pierced in a cross pattern;
then press the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see that it is coming out, remove the needles, and leave the wound to drain until it can heal; or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then clean the wound as needed, and treat the abscess as we have said;
or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then clean the wound as needed, and treat the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture which you find, then treat the area as appropriate, and close up the wound.
from sores
We have discussed in the division the likenesses of sores, and how one should work with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure by iron; and we speak of sores which are found in the genitals, and great caution is needed in their treatment. The ancient ones say that when sores are in a place where they can be scratched, like sores found on breasts, or thighs, or similar places, then one should completely remove them when they are in their beginning stage. But when they are large and old, one should not touch them, for I have never been able to heal any such sores, nor has anyone healed them before me.
And when the sore is in a place which can be removed, as we have said, it is that you purge the patient with black bile; then make him satiated if there is manifest repletion, then open the sore gently 1 inch wide to perform the operation; then cut the flesh of the sore, and the skin and fat from all around it, leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow out freely, and press the wound with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the artery or vein causes a pulse, cauterize it until the pulse stops; then treat the wound further until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already discussed in the division of similarities the appearance of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment through medicine, and that which is cured by iron; so let it be known only; and you must not use iron for these two appearances: that is to say, tympany and hydrops, because they are deadly; therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure does not help, then consider if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as stomach pain and similar things; in these cases, do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see that the patient is very strong and only has dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: gently lay the patient flat on his back, and press his stomach upwards to push the fluid to the lowest part of the abdomen near the groin, then take a spiny spathum according to this form: And let it be as thin as 2 parts at the tip, and yet not so sharp that it would pierce through to the intestines when it is inserted, nor so blunt that it won't go in;
then check if the dropsy is located near the intestines: in that case, you must split open below on the palm side of the index finger 3 times directly; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side of the palm; and if it is due to kidney disease, then on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluid does not flow into that weak area.
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and fill it up, and release your hand over the entire spatumile between the skin and the syphac as though scraping off in the quantity of a fingernail or so; then pierce the syphac until the spatumile reaches the desired location, and that is the place for the water; then draw it out, and insert this instrument from which comes the shape: And it is similar to a silver needle, and is made of lightweight copper or bronze, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision from which scribes cut the pen:
at the top of which is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it falls immediately upon the instrument; empty it therefore by half or by a third, for if you empty more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock to his spirit, or he will faint, or he will come close to death;
but empty it according to the amount of his strength, and according to what the disposition of his strength indicates, and his pulses; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the hole which is above the syphac, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small amount of water;
do this for a few days and avoid bathing until it is completely healed. And if you doubt the wound, leave it with a lot of water, then treat it with hot earth or sand, and through sweating in a bath and in the sun, and by drinking; and treat it with medications to dry it up until it heals, and cauterize over the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the pus as I have said before.
of the swelling of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening on the penis, or the opening is small and not in the right place. Then one must immediately pierce it with a very thin spatulum according to this form: then put into the opening a very thin plug of lead, and ligate it and leave it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close. Those with a small opening will be helped by the plug of lead, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the opening in its place are blighted, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, and because of this they cannot urinate before they lift their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to do it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head of the penis and the foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stanch the flow of blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the penis Many times these blisters come on the penis, and they have an unattractive appearance; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a small, sharp knife, and cut away and clean all of them, then put on wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is malignant, discolored and suppurating, then cauterize it. When you have cut it, and if the blister is on the shaft of the penis, with part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the blister that is inside; and when it is sutured, treat the outside. For if you treat them both together, there is not assured that the skin of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption can come into his penis and testicles; so cut away all that is black and腐, then apply an ointment made of honey and flour from pomegranate peel and rosebuds, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two functions together: that is, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should insert a tube into the urethra and let the patient urinate; and when there is a discharge at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument until the foreskin is detached and the head of the penis is completely exposed.
And if it is difficult to remove the foreskin, then you must scrape it with a spatulum made of some soft metal at the tip of the penis and around the glans; then release it gently between your fingers, and place a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water over it so that it does not become inflamed again.
On circumcision:
Circumcision is not like other wounds in that it does not heal on its own; nevertheless, when we perform this procedure intentionally, especially on children, we must do the best and least harmful job.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the greater part of masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the foreskin, and in many places, and on any new-born; then the hymen would be cut because there are two membranes, and sometimes one is cut above and the other remains below.
Now they recover quickly, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is done to the foreskin is not secure the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the nail sometimes the iron slips and they ruin the work, and many times are born thus that they do not need cleaning, and I have seen it.
Of the cleaning that is done to the foreskin all over the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as below.Or li fuit li doler qui tailla l’ungle, si doit il le tailler par fin et non pas par costé, car par fin il ne se peult mander; si doit il estre tailli par costé, et il faut qu’il soit tailli tant qu’il eschieve la chair.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly into the skin all around; but the thread must be wrapped tightly around the penis; and the method of the first operation is such that if the child understands, you make him believe that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then you make him urinate in every way you can. Then hold it upright between your hands, and press the foreskin between your fingers so that the child does not see it or any of the instruments; then push your hand up to the penis and breathe on it, and draw it upward until the head of the penis is exposed; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the area with a double thread, then tie it below with another thread; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature at the foreskin and testicle, and pinch between the two threads, then quickly pull up on the penis;
Then hold it upright between your hands, and press the foreskin between your fingers so that the child does not see it or any of the instruments; then push your hand up to the penis and breathe on it, and draw it upward until the head of the penis is exposed; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the area with a double thread, then tie it below with another thread; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature at the foreskin and testicle, and pinch between the two threads, then quickly pull up on the penis; then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, a linen cloth glued with an egg yolk cooked in rosewater, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it again until it is healed.
The form of the foreskin after cleansing should be as follows: the two foreskins should be thin and pointed, and the foreskin should be as large as the palm of the hand evenly.
the error of purification is when the pus within the incision escapes; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail, so that the skin forms an abscess; and then cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers and then cut.
And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess has subsided and the skin is slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Therefore, treat the area of the wound with a soothing powder, as we have described in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts too deeply into the foreskin, and it goes above, it will not harm; therefore, cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine:
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or a foreign body, or similar objects which we have mentioned in the classification.
If the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend his knees, and have his feet placed on his back, and press his abdomen from above the back, and restrain himself as much as he can; this will force the neck of the bladder to express the stone upwards, causing the urine to be released.
If it does not work as described, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use a syringe, a medical instrument with a delicate silver tube as thin as a bird's feather, about a palm and a half in length, with a subtle tip at the end.
The procedure for releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread and attach a small ball of wool or cotton at the end; insert the tip of the thread into the syringe, and then dip the excess wool into oil, butter, or egg white. Have the patient sit on a chair, and apply oil, olive oil, or warm water to the bladder and penis.
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain reach the empty space; if this is not done according to this order, then the person guiding where it goes is doing it wrong; then tie off the thread all along the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
then restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the local hair around which the medicine must be applied so that it blocks the penis without addition, and allows moisture to be extracted and pushed out when necessary;
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and suck while pulling outwards; then push the moisture inwards with force; the moisture will enter inside, and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which they treat the bladder: it is made like this:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below it has 1 or 2 strings attached; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to treat the bladder; then tie the two strings formed from a long double thread, and heat one end of the moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then pull your hand towards the bladder in a smooth manner, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make .i. circle, and pierce it all around; then insert .i. strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dal, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to squeeze it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already spoken in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate on the cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water goes from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and it seems like a hare's ear, and it hurts the patient its penis, and it can hurt him many times, and then he gets worse; and many of these have the hernia; and the healing is much easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and it is in between youth and old age; and the cure is much easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For sometimes they obstruct in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him from below so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then let him sit between your equipped hands, and his hands are under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then search for it and touch it inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut on the stone. And if it does not come out with touching from everywhere, then moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, press it to the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and push the stone out where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to lift the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, which is its shape:
And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight on the stone, and both feet should be at the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the pressure from the feet at the anus will cause it to emerge without effort; and you should know that there is stone with angles and edges: some are easy to extract; and there are others which are round like a grape, whose extraction is easier.
For those with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it cannot be extracted, then you must grip it with tweezers which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert below an instrument with a subtle, curved tip; and if you cannot grasp it thus, then enlarge the opening and, if the blood vessels are cut, stop the bleeding with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then insert the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then push upward, then extract it, and the smaller ones after, if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be broken up, and a larger incision made. For there are two things that can happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine may flow out through the opening where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, you must try to extract it, or break it up with tweezers, until you have extracted it in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resume the treatment on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained because of this, felt in such a way that it comes out with the urine: then pierce your finger into the wound and draw out the blood, for if any remains, the bladder will be corrupted and burst;
then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and treat it in every way you know how until it is healed; and it is necessary that every hour when you treat him, to bind his thighs together and assemble the remedies over the site.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said before, that you should cut it many times, is an excuse for not cutting, as I have already experienced this.
Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be pointed at three angles and fixed in a brand:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the iron into the penis until it reaches the stone, and turn the iron in your hand within the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come out at once, and press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis. Then it will be broken at once, and will come out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that causes him pain, then tie one thread under the stone and another above it, then cut the penis in the place where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stone
It sometimes happens that stone is lodged in women's bodies, and if it does, the cure is difficult due to three reasons: one is that the woman might be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to examine them, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that one might not be able to find a skilled female practitioner in this art of medicine; and the fourth is that women's stones are often deeper than men's, requiring deeper incisions, which causes great fear.
And if one needs to do so, they should take a skilled midwife, and with her, a wise old woman who knows about women's bodies, or a woman who understands part of the art, and command them to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin; then she should push her finger into her vagina and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and recommend that she pushes her finger into her vagina with the disease, and searches and presses her left hand firmly on her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move it from the entrance of the bladder gradually to under the root of the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her finger on top of or underneath the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone is sharp enough to cut through, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ribs; know their similarities to find the exit.
And if the blood goes away, then apply crushed vitriol and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your task;
and if the blood flows and it is from the artery which is cut, then apply powder to the area and constrict it with bandages and linen, and do not loosen it again, and leave the stone and do not extract it at all, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the pulse has returned to normal, return to your work until the stone is out.
of carnous hernia
Rami ce aquo us e is nothing other than the gathering of moisture or white pus, which is under the heart of the testicles and contains the egg; and it is called "sy pha c", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus which we have said; and this doesn't always happen.
And the cause of this disease is weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours: sometimes it is declining towards jaundice, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and it happens more.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, then it is a swelling, like a nut in size, and does not open the testicle, because it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the testicle itself, then it is a swelling with part of an egg, and because of this they think it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, he feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intrusions, from which the form is as mentioned above. According to this, then, what comes after the intrusion, judge what is within.
According to this, then, what comes after the intrusion, judge what is within. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and a lot of cloth is placed under him.
Then he sits on his left side and commands the assistant to sit on his right, extending the wand to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles.
take the spatulum and cut the skin of the testicles from on high down to the base of the scrotum, and make the incision straight as you cut through the skin of the testicles up to the white membrane, and then remove the skin gently according to your skill.
then pierce the testicle sac with a large needle and draw out all the fluid, then insert your probes, and tie up the sac above; do not touch the heart of the testicles but only the sac; cut around it carefully in sections, for if you do not cut it well enough, the fluid will return.
and if the scrotum sac has been cut during your work, then put it back in its place once you have finished the operation on the testicle sac; then sew together the two edges of the heart of the testicles with one stitch, then treat it like any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find that the sac is corrupted by another disease, then you should ligate the vessels that are suspended, fearing the loss of blood; then cut off the testicle at its suspension, and extract it, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water has collected in two parts together, know that they are two blisters; then treat the other part just as you did the first, then wash away the blood, and insert into the wound soft, moist linen in rose oil.
and insert another piece of soft, moist linen in wine and oil, and place it over the two blisters, and place doubled pieces of cloth on top, and tie it around with a bandage all along its length in this way:
Then take two pieces of cloth, and stuff them with cotton according to this shape, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and one end press against the buttock up to the back, and the other at the groin area; and the other two ends on top of the two armpits, and have all the ties gathered in a bow of the breeches.
And sometimes this blister is treated with an iron brand instead, and it is that you press a small, thin knife against the skin of the blisters, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed.
if one takes the cautery according to this form, and pierces the sinus with it, and burns it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cup in every way you can, as much as you extract everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and move guard against bloodletting, and changes that the operations of surgery;
and if nothing makes you contrary, or hot abscesses or bloodletting or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform puncturing as I told you before, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the water has been drawn out,
Let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at the lower part to the whole of the spatula's breadth, and put the perforation in the long part of the body; and let the holes be wide, so that all the pus may flow out;
then put cotton on the spot, and bandage it, and let the remaining pus run out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white veil does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument used to treat water-based diseases into it, of which the form is described above; and open the wound a little, and know that the pus will return, and is accumulated after six months or so, and when it is accumulated as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the dissection of this nerve there are many arrangements that cause fear, so it seems better to leave it untouched.
and I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the genitals; and there are many causes for this.
This is to know from an excessive bitterness and heat, which is spread in the genitals, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; it does not hurt, and the abscess is serious;
and sometimes there are grey, fearful, and blood-like abscesses, and sometimes they come from a broken artery or vein inflammation.
When it is from a broken artery, it is recognizable by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are swollen with fluid are known by their appearance and the touch of two fingers.
and anyone can well judge by this appearance and other marks; and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then the yolk is on top, and the white part under it, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already cooked with these signs, then you must cut the egg and the skin.
and if it is air in the syringe, or within the vessels, then you must release all that air and fill the cup again.
And if the yolk is at the back end, then you must open it all and remove the yolk as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with soft lambs' wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he urinates;
and the treatment of this disease is also dangerous as that which came before,
and yet we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on a raised chair, then tie the suspensory of testicles low on his legs with your fingers. take all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them tightly, and stretch them firmly.
Then, with a sharp knife, cut through the vessels widely enough so that they are exposed,
and then skin each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then I push an needle where it hurts .i. double thread, and tie it to the first place where the pain came from, and tie it straight to the other end; then the cup according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then cure the wound as with others, or that any bleeding vessel that nourishes one of the testicles;
because through this there is no harm, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one should milk the testicles from all the vessels; so that the veins do not lose their moisture through the incision, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rot of the sinus The causes of this hernia are through the incision that comes to the sinus, or the extension above the belly in the part of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that hernia to one of the groins;
and this hernia is in the sinus, or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from causes: from percussion, or from jumping, or from straining, or from lifting heavy loads, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is dislocation of the shoulder blade are that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly. and abscesses are even all the way to the bottom because the shoulder blade presses on the intestines.
And the signs of dislocation of the shoulder blade are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses under the skin near the surface, which is due to the exit of the intestines and the body being displaced by the shoulder blade.
And sometimes the nerves are displaced with the intestines, and it is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, one should fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
And the way to do this operation is that you instruct the patient to pull his intestines out into his hand through the wound, if he can; then hold him firmly by the neck between your hands and lift up his legs;
then cut open the chest, and slice all the way down to the bones of the ribs; then insert hooks into the lips of the incision according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out.
then scrape off the pimple under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white pimple is uncovered all around.
then put your index finger into what follows the scrotum, between the white pimple under the skin of the testicle and the second pimple.
and move the testicle with your right hand to the left, and the white pimple should be lifted up towards your left palm, and lift the testicle with all the pimple towards your waist. and instruct the assistant to extend the arm overhead, and loosen what is tight behind the joint;
and feel with your fingers if there is any hard, white, membrane-like thing wrapped around the intestine, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
then take a needle with .i. thick thread made of 10 threads, and push it through the back part of the syphon, which is under the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then grip the shoulder which appears from the threads, until there are 4 threads; then tie them one above the other in a cross shape, and attach the syphon, of which we have spoken that is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the head with threads, and tie it tightly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no abscess forms; and put the thread according to the first long thread in two turns of it, and after these two threads leave the cotton which is under the heart of the testicles, the largest of a bean;
and then according to the roundness that the testicles carry; then press into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the scrotum, as we have said before;et s’il ne peut gueres ou point demorer en celui liien, si fait le second liien sus les testicules, et les liien tan tans qu’il le puet souffrir.
and if he cannot stay in that thread for long or at all, then make the second thread over the testicles, and tie it as tightly as he can bear it. Then apply woolen cloth moistened in oil, and place it on the wound, and apply the thread we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and leave the ligature in place until it bites through; and if it is slow to bite, then use a hot iron, and put on what we have mentioned, until it bites.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.Et quant il sont sanez, si met sur li liien ou cautere de feu, et les remue ains qu’il se muevent, et remettant li lius en son leu.
of carnous hernia
In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients say that it is made like the ramus which is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and lightly underneath;
then cut into it halfway, and cure the abscess of him who opens it, until the vessels leak; and cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes the wound opens into the bowels, as we have said, and the place is exposed; and none of the intestines should come out with the faeces, and if they do, it is a little bit, and it heals within hours;
and yet if he remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer will suppurate until the intestines protrude;
and this happens because of the extension of the ulcer which is at the angles, as we have said, for it extends and then becomes soft and swollen and open;
and the treatment is with a cautery, as we have already said. Sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then fill the wound with salt according to its size, about a quarter of a pound;
and then extract the boil which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible spot of the boil;
and press it deeply into the belly, then tie the two ends of thread visible over the boil on the head of the thread, and tie them one and then the other;
then pull out the head of the thread, and do not cover the boil or stretch it with anything, as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal worms;
then treat it as a wound. And when you tie off the threads, let the boil drain and the wound heal until it is cleaned out.
The syphilis is hidden, and has no appearance in the mouth; and the cautery is effective in this place, and is closer to a cure.
from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the parts inside become soft and look swollen; and when one wants to cure it, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin on top of the natural membrane; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch, or three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the stitches.
from chastity
You know that castration is forbidden by our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, it is necessary in two cases: the first is so that owners can respond to inquiries about their animals and treat them; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as bulls, rams, pigs, and other beasts. Thus, there are two ways of performing castration: either by cutting or by crushing. When we perform it by crushing, we sit the animal in hot water until its testicles become soft and pendant; then we squeeze them with our hand until they are dislodged and we no longer feel anything. As for castration by cutting, one must tie the animal down and press the scrotum against the left hand; then cut it open, applying pressure to each testicle once you have well-scalded them; leave some of the fat and thin membrane that covers the vessels; this method of castration is better than the one performed by crushing, because with crushing something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire sexual intercourse; then treat the wound until it heals.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types as men: the first is that between the two testicles appears as the form of nature of a woman, having hair, and sometimes urinate through it. And the other type is in women, having on the scrotum a penis and testicles. And the treatment for both men and women is to cut away the excess flesh, and treat them like any other wound; but for the second type of man, from whom urine escapes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the testicles
of the testicles
of erratics
Of erratics: Erratica is a swelling above the natural part, so large and unsightly that it disfigures the patient; some women have them as big as a hand, and this is the cure. You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your fingernails, and scrape gently; do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then cure another cure until it heals; and there is another tumor that grows at the mouth of the vagina, use it, and perhaps it will burst, resembling a cow's udder, hence the ancients called it "cow disease." You should treat this as we have said for the tentigene, and cure it until healed.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins that cause blood to flow, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbber; and we have already discussed their likenesses, signs, and treatment methods. I stated that hemorrhoids and throbbers, when they are formed in the anus, and there is no sensation of pain, cannot be cured with a hot iron. Those that form at the mouth of the anus can be sensed and treated. Therefore, one should place the patient in a cool room, then cut off the hemorrhoids with tongs and cauterize their roots with powdered astringent medicines such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, and afterwards submerge them in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should be made to sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, galls, and similar substances; and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to her back. If the bleeding stops, that is good. If not, leech her back and breasts without using an iron; then take lamb's wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has settled, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a roughened head, so it should be treated as I have described for throbbers; then cure it until it heals.
of abscesses in the anus
Abscesses in the anus can arise from various causes, such as sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, as I have discussed earlier. Now, I will describe the hot abscess that forms in the anus, which is not like those that develop in the bowel. If you want to know how to treat it with iron, observe whether the abscess is painful and red upon its onset, and also consider if there is fever. Then, do not rush to pierce it; instead, let the pain subside first. Next, make the patient sit on a chair, with two small pillows to lean against for support, one on the back and another beneath the feet, which should be spread apart. Place the arms under the knees, and tie them securely with a good cord. Then, suck the anus towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the anus, checking the depth of the anus so that the inserted instrument does not go deeper than necessary and cause pain to the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloth so that it is not irritated. Place the tip of the instrument at the entrance of the anus, and apply pressure while inserting it. When the abscess breaks open and becomes soft, cover the wound with a poultice made from moist rosin or moistened in oil. Place the poultice within the wound, pushing it towards the depth of the anus and over the anus, covering the entire area. Then, apply ointment for two days until the wound heals. Sometimes, raising the anus and cleansing the wound with water and honey helps, followed by applying water in which lily roots and aristolochia have been boiled. Afterwards, return to using the ointment. If the wound has settled within the anus, refrain from using iron; instead, treat it as I have described earlier.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first understand the natural process of childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell aromatic herbs, then hasten the child's delivery; then you will know that this childbirth follows nature's course, and the baby emerges head first, followed by the بعدين with it; and when you see these signs, gently press her abdomen so that the baby is delivered promptly; for when the baby descends toward the head, the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother's excess fluids are expelled through proper cleansing; and anything different from this is not a natural birth. Sometimes the baby emerges feet first, or the body or shoulder, hands, or abdomen, and in some cases, the baby may be turned upside down; there are many unnatural positions. Thus, the midwife must be wise and astute in these matters, guarding against error and deception, and I shall explain to you how to assist in all these various scenarios.
If the baby emerges head first in a natural delivery, and the woman gives birth with great effort due to her weak constitution, then make her sit on a stool or have other women support her; then apply a warm ointment made from fried oil or fenugreek between the midwife's fingers in the form of a small spatula: and split the afterbirth, and scrape its edges until the moistness that is within flows out; then pinch the woman's abdomen so that the baby descends, and if it does not descend, give her a clyster made from fenugreek with warming oil; then make her sneeze and cough gently, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; then the baby will be delivered. And if both hands emerge first, then gently push them back in little by little; and if they cannot go back in, have the woman sit on a chair and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground and rock it slightly so that she leans forward; and if the hands still cannot go back in, and the baby is dead, then grab the hands at the knuckles as described earlier, extract the child, and proceed likewise.
of the delivery of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it should be turned upside down. And then turn it slowly, until it is straightened out;
then grab one of the feet and stretch it out slowly.
When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct him to grab it, and make him sneeze forcefully; if he jumps out, God willing.
And if it doesn't jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back to its natural position. For then it is easy.
And if it does not work as we have said, take myrrh, and oil of six-year-old wine, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and let this ointment work, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, make a collar of myrrh for her, and put it on her underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose shut, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out soon. the child will emerge onto its knees When the child comes in this form, then you must gently place your hands on it;
of the emergence of the child who comes out with one hand hanging down It is necessary to know how to replace the hand: if it cannot be replaced, then make the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then apply the medicine that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to bring the hand back; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command that she squeeze until the baby comes out.
from the child's exit above its neck, and spread her hands, and turn her face towards her mother's back I must make him grip her hand, then turn it slowly, and gently;
and when it is even, then put on the nature of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct that it moves a little bit at a time.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way for all the afterbirth
in the same way for all the afterbirth When it comes out in this way to all the afterbirth, then grip the afterbirth with your finger, as long as the moisture is emptied;
and if the child puts its hands on its face and neck, and the mother slaps it so that it is not restrained, and the child dies;
then put the child inside, as you should, and instruct the woman to hold on for a while;
of the hernia Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens rarely. [I think there is a mistake here as the previous sentence ends with "and it happens rarely", so I will assume there was meant to be a 'but' instead of 'poc' in this line.]
I know that they are split [or divided], and are separated by the sac that divides them, which is attached to the placenta.
and sometimes they issue just as naturally as a single child, as we have said.
And if they are bleeding heavily, then apply the treatment as we have said, and let the bandages be fine, and quickly and gently do what she does. and do thus whatever will bring about healing. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage,
and one must teach the patient everything, for by chance something like this may happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of a dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead fetus or pregnancy, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual methods; if you should know whether the woman is of sound body, and has no fear of death.
the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down, and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply a compress of ten parts, binding it to her abdomen so that she is not treated for the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils infused with myrrh and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and myrrh; then gently tap them, then put them in a place where they can grow,
and take care that the baby does not fall on its head; if it sticks the nails in its eyes or nose or mouth or throat or beard or armpit or near the ribs,
and if the swelling is on the feet, then stab it or pinch it at the middle of the shins;
and he should dye the nail on his right hand, and place the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and wind it around his whole hand gently, and insert the needle into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow space;
then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be equally tight by moving from one side to another so that the movement can happen, and the needles should be bitten down upon so as to hold the movement in place, as shown here in this illustration:
And if a portion remains, then anoint one of his fingers with oil, and rub it into that part, and draw the other part.
and if nothing remains, then put this joint or a higher one in place, and hold it until all the strength goes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out.
then the scald on the bend of the foot or on the elbow, and likewise you should do to the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is big and it is constricted in the birth canal, or it has acute pain concentrated in one spot, you should insert a thorn between your fingers, and pierce the head to draw out the venom. or you can use the instrument called "almidach", whose shape comes from the instrument in this chapter.
and thus the child is born with a large head naturally; and then pulls out the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is forced back in, it should be split open so that the moisture which is causing the problem can escape;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
And if it is tight in the belly or the foot, you must stretch it with one folded cloth wrapped around your hand; and open the belly or the foot, so that the moisture which is in there runs out;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then he should put his hand into the wound and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; then he should cut off one or two nails, and draw it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, one must administer moist and fatty things; and one should apply poultices, and use warm water that softens and moistens.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie down flat, then administer what we have said for a living child:
and if one cannot, then carry the child out by pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta behind.
And when you have done this, if he is affected with those abscesses that come in the sea;
and blood flows out, let it be put into cold water, and let other remedies be applied.
And I saw a woman in whose belly some fetus had been dead, then another was sewn over it, and the other died as well. After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attractive plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days another one did too. I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Examine the wound, and use your hands to feel for bones, until the woman is in a better state. and let the woman stay like this for a long time, and then move her bowels slightly from her position;
and I have included this chapter only because when the master finds something unusual, he can apply a remedy.
to bring the dislocation back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one ties books; and at two turns of the two arms. Nevertheless, let the horns be more subtle than the constrictor, and made of boxwood or ebony;
and let the mouth of the beam be one digit wide, and the edges of the wood one digit apart, and one palm and a half long; and in the two beams are two adjustments of this same beam, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the wound to open when you turn the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ivory or boxwood, according to the likeness of tweezers; and has two ends with two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the wound with all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then put the two pieces of the instrument together in the water, and hold the head of the instrument under between his thighs; then work your hand on the instrument, just like you did with the pliers, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the water, as long as the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated, and their designs vary; and when the patient sees them prepared, the effect is more immediate and more powerful on people due to their appearance.
Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not preventable.
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then make her sneeze with an aromatic substance. You must then press her hands against her mouth and nose. And if she urinates through it, that is good.
If not, take a container and make an opening in its cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as hellebore, rue, anise, chamomile, casia, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire. Then place one end of the straw into the opening of the pot and the other end into the mouth of the womb,
and the dye until the vapors enter the marble; then make it sneeze, as we have said. Then the secondine suddenly. And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, order the bather to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk-balm, and then put it back in the natural position,
and desire the secondine; and when she has found it, she should squeeze it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marble does not crack; But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; thus it will come loose and release itself.
And if the opening of the wound is tight, we have discussed the cure for sneezing and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not from anything that we have mentioned, then be careful not to pull;
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse her with a four-drug ointment;
if she vomits and it comes out, but nonetheless, when she vomits, there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and it weakens the sick person.
If necessary, therefore, appropriate fumigations should be used: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is this:
And it is made of glass like a cane, and one puts the pointed end into the nature, and the wide ends above the fire;
and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the tinder until it is wasted, and begin another.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather have a subtle hymen: so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce the hymen with her finger, and not with a pointed instrument, and to be careful that she does not tear it;
then place on a wet cloth with wine and oil, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a splint of wood through the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to walk.
And sometimes this healing happens suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: it should be treated, as we have said, with a splint of wood.
from the fistula in the anus Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from the anus itself or in the space between its two halves.
If there is one or more fistula; and when that nodule is old, it opens and secretes a white moisture or thin pus,
and sometimes these fistulas are perforated; and they are caused by what comes out of the anus or by flatulence when the patient breaks wind, and occasionally one of them pops out.
And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and even to the testicles.
And so one recognizes the fistula when it is persistent in the anus, but not persisting. and you put your index finger or thumb into the anus and push a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has a twist to it, then you insert a slender probe made of lead or a horsehair until you feel the probe or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no pus or wind coming out, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; then hurry to heal it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the urethra, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent is pushed up to the site. If there is twisting and pain in the groin, then it is that it must be cut out, and medicine or ointment will not help.
and for these persistent ulcers there is no cure despite the effort and the foolish remedies of those who interfere.
For one that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And let the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs tilted towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of wood if there is twisting, as much as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain around their anus, you must insert your index finger.
If you then feel that it pierces the rectum; and whether it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the anus or the flesh, then know that it is perforated; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One says nevertheless that some can be healed well, but that happens rarely;
and the aid which is done, one burns the cautery sutilly according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and put it all hot into the fistula, as far as the anus; and do this twice or thrice, until you know that these burnt threads are burnt, which look like a feather of a bird;
and then treat it with moist bandages soaked in butter, until the threads come out, and then treat it with ointment to heal and close the wound.
If it is thus healed, that is good. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent is inserted and does not penetrate to the depth that is at the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of syphac, and you see the fistula in that which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and then plug it before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and will fall out; then cut off those falsified flesh that looks like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus runs out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: scorching of the flesh and bloodletting, and drying out moisture;
then tent treatment with butter or crushed substances, until the pus flows out and the burns heal.
then treat the wound with poultices of soft, moist, black, charred matter; and the remedies are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or plug it up, and ask for help.
If you feel the hernia, and between them is the testicle or scrotum, or it is ready to rupture, then do not delay but seek treatment immediately using one of three methods:
either by cauterizing it as we have said, or cutting it to the bottom, or if you can, insert a tent and treat it as before.
And do not go too deep, lest you cut into the bowel that holds the anus and cause an erection through which waste may exit. then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; by chance you will be cured, or remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument; then probe the wound, as much as you can;
then examine how to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes they are fistulas according to this way: it is when you put the tent in the fistula and it is at the side of the foundation next to the skin above. Take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And thread .ii. threads through it, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it pierces through the margin within the foundation, then pull out the thread from that opening, so that you push your finger into the foundation;
and draw the head with thread, and bring together the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and leave them for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh that is between them, and separate;
then cure the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Because it is not appropriate to bandage too tightly and then to treat, as we have said, until it has healed.
The form of the spiny spatumile, which is made into a fistula, is very sharp and pointed on one side. On the other side it is not sharp, so that it should not be bandaged as it should not be, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they sometimes leak blood. And some protrude from the anus and from the top of the anus; but those that protrude have little moisture.
And they sometimes leak a little water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to straining to go to the toilet until the hemorrhoids protrude and are visible; if you hurry, and you can grab it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then pull it out by the roots;
and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, then grab them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; and pull it out with your fingers, then crush it, and powder some hot powder on top of it that acts as a cautery; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the foundations cannot emerge, then cleanse the patient with a strong and harsh enema to wash away what is in the foundations, so that they can emerge openly.
When the patients defecate, and if the thread is still outside the anus, then the treatment is easy. and you can grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and the incision is closed by iron.
If you need to perform surgery in this way: take a twisted thread, and thread it through a needle, then bring the two ends of the thread under the needle from the other side, and if it is too large; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
then place over the wound a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and apply pressure on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it heal naturally, and once it has healed, treat it with ointments and other remedies until it is completely healed.
from dryness of the vagina or anus Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and due to the constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
So you should cut at the tip of a spatula or your nail into the skin on top, which allows moisture to enter. Then dry it until it is stiff as it should be.
And if it cannot stiffen, then restart the scraping more aggressively than before, until it heals and is scalded. then treat until healed.
where it trembles Ant is a small appearance wrought under the body, and goes very deep;
and sometimes the ant stings, and it feels like death from trembling, and it comes over the whole body, more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this cane on the shiver, so that the purple circle the shiver all around. Then turn your hand to all the cane, so as to stroke all around the shiver, and press it in deeply, and squeeze the shiver from its roots.
And if you see, make it with a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top.
Do not pierce it, so that it can be held in the hand, and press and squeeze it. And if you see, cauterize the shiver, as it is before in the chapter on cautery.
of the shape of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten copper or sheet metal; and sometimes they are made small or large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those that are administered to children, the weak and sick, should be small.
The shape of the enema, whether it is small or large, depends on the width of the rectum, according to this method:
and there is an opening where the abdomen is tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other;
and the abdomen where one puts medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and between each hole there is a distance of one digit, then insert into these holes one strong thread of twisted flax, and tie the abdomen like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently;
Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is empty, then withdraw the syringe and let the patient hold his legs against his body,
and if the medicine wants to come out, he should press it as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even more helpful.
And if you use the syringe for the sickness of a flowing stomach, and the medicine rushes out, he should repeat it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then let the enema be as thin as for a child.
and this is the form of the thin enema that makes the skin tight:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
The objects that cause wounds are stones thrown with force, and sword and knife cuts, or lance, staff, arrow, or similar objects.
Or wounds are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar organs.
And I will tell you how to treat each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the discussion will come back around in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one must take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you doubt there is a hot abscess; then have it bled from the cephalic vein immediately if it is bleeding from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the damaged part;
and let the patient avoid rich foods and wine.
And if he does not want to be bled, then let his food be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and place it on the wound, if a hot abscess develops, use cotton soaked only in rose oil or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding and not moved by air, the powder that I will describe in a little while;
and if it has been moved by the air, then place some ointments on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the abdomen, in the rib cage.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and open, and only attached by a little bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not near the bone, then cut out the pus completely, and pour it out, then cure it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie it off with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: put this powder on so that it will not move until the wound has healed.
And the way to make the powder is this: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely. and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it heals completely and joins together with the blood.
bind it tightly and leave it loose if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes cautery is done with a hot iron only, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood; but the wound must be moved by the cautery.
And if the cautery has moved the wound, apply this powder directly to it;
but place over it some soothing ointments, or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft; then treat other wounds until they are healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will pull it out with fine pincers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
of a wound on the neck
If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let it be, and not put anything constricting on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw.Se c’est li artere, si convient la curer et faire sangler, car elle ne doit point rester ou leu qu’elle est. And nothing cold should be placed on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.Et il convient que l’on fasse le sangler et la cure, car elle ne doit point demorer ou leu qu’elle est, si adone li maux est grant;
But let the medicine be under him, as hot water washed in cold water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in cold water,and if he has a headache or fever or pain anywhere, let him be bled, so that he may be relieved of his illness.Et s’il a male de chief ou fievre ou douleur en quelque lieu, fasse sangler pour qu’il soit delivrez de sa maladie; and other moist stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep, and she is pregnant and full of bowels, then pierce her or lower;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then ligate it, and stop it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the neck, and the windpipe is kept intact, through which the food goes, if he cuts the neck above the Adam's apple, and doesn't touch the throat but puts it back into its natural shape, and then he stretches it gently and leaves it for several days, then he treats it with cleansing ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then it will; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound can heal. and then clean and bind up the dislocation.
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
of the wound from a spear or knife
If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound issues blood and pus: know therefore that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh and bleeding with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it at first or ligature it for fear of the blood clotting deeply; and let the patient rest and recover; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iii. days, or .iv., or more; if there is no spasms, nor tremors, nor pains in the heart, nor twitches of the limbs; and when you see the bones back in alignment, then you know the wound is healed. Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is still discharge, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it as needed.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the top or bottom, treat it as follows:
if it is large, with sewing; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has pieces broken off, then the wound, and the arrows, if they are stuck in, must be pulled out. and if they are not stuck in, let the wound fester, so that it will heal.
and for other wounds on other body parts, the judgement is as we have said.
rupture of the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
from the large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, emerge, through which the entrance of air occurs;
and the cure is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one,
because one returns the intestines to their place with pins, if one does not return them gradually from hot to cold; for the intestines, when they feel cold, quickly return inside.
and therefore, it is necessary to massage the soft wound, and therefore we must massage the intestines into their place along with the others [2.10]
And know that hernia of the abdomen occurs in four ways:
the two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and another two stitches specific to the wound are common to other wounds;
yet they are more appropriate with the stitching of the abdomen, and I will describe each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small, and some intestines protrude, and the injury is slight, it can be treated by one of two methods:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: wet a sponge or soft cloth with only lukewarm water, or you cook in water squint and cypress and spike, and boil the intestines until they are swollen;
and sometimes makes this restraining wine, and it is milked that it may soothe.
And when you see the swelling depart, then mix the intestines with water or old wine and let them cook, for through this, the entrance is restricted to a small amount;
and if it cannot enter, then they make an incision in the instrument with which they cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is bloodletting rather than cutting, and one should not cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if cut inside the curve and not out, and observe the form here:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if one puts it back according to its natural form in its proper place, if you can, for this is best.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should have the patient lie on his back, and his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the ruture of the belly is in one of the .ij. parts if you place your understanding so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
and thus one must treat those who are large and medium sized wounds.
For small wounds, use what you have available,
then have at hand a minister of pity who will put his entire hand on the wound, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of sewing.
and this is the common method of sewing. take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a distance of one finger from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the wound,
then draw it together with a double thread around an awl in two places, and then bring together the two heads of the wound smoothly,
and then leave. I put a distance of two fingers, and I stick another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well. therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not cut and open the wound before the scabs form;
and then cut the head of the needles so that they do not pricke the patient when he sleeps, and put tents or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is closed.
and this method of sewing with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are enough.
The second stitch is common, and is where you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle and a strong, thin thread; and when you have pierced all four of these joints together,
and when you have pierced all four of these joints together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the way they sew up clothes;
and put a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb nail;
this stitching is for a man,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
which had been made by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and the intestines protruded out more than two palms,
and the wound was near the navel. I returned his intestines to their proper place after they had been outside his body for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was sewn up until the fifteenth day, and I treated it, and it healed.
And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where there were no ointments or medicines to be found; and I applied old cotton twice a day to the wound and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and pierce it through from one side to the other;
when it has pierced through the heart from right to right, then place the needle in the back of the throat.
and pierce it through from the other side of that part all the way to the chest;
and the meaning of this sewing is that you sew as the leather-workers do with skins, and let one side of the throat hang loose while you tighten the other, until the sewing is complete.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly,
is if it is like two pieces of wood that are joined together naturally, and they apply the end of one piece to the other, in such a way:
stick an awl or needle into the nearest part, and only pierce that area, let the two shoulders of the syringe then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside part just to the inside, so as to let the two shoulders of the syringe.
then pierce one and the other from the outside part just to the inside, in two other shoulders of the mirach that are on the other side;
and this is the best way to sew and the most common.
Galen says these words, and some testify to it,
that one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each;
and one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew shoes;
and you know that when the hernia is in the abdomen, the incision is deeper than other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, as long as the flesh has not moved, if one wants to put back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on the powder of black gall.
if one wants to put back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on the powder of black gall. and if there is any movement in the wound, put on some ointment that is available until it heals. and they sew up the thread, and seal the sutures, and the mastic; then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to drip, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it heals.
For you do not need any other medicine for various wounds when they are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound is causing infection in the principal members, then you must moisten a light woolen cloth with tempered oil or rose oil. and place it around the wounds and under the armpits.
and if he feels pain or swelling in the groin, which often occurs, you must place it around the wounds and under the body and head; you should also use enemas of warm red wine, especially if the swelling extends to the intestines.
and it pierces inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it's because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity to its nature of the nerves.
And if the zarbe jumps out of the wound, he puts it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned black or blue, then you should tie off the area that is black so that no more blood flows to it, because there are veins and arteries in it;
then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two pieces hanging from the part below the wound until it is healed to aid in extraction when the scabs fall off, and the wound heals.
of the road of the boil
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, one can repair it in some people,
because I saw a man who was pierced in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and discharged pus and gas;
I treated it with cauterization according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and he had no ill effects, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take cow's guts, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the gut has opened its mouth, place it on both lips,
then put another splint in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
and bind the wound. If they grow in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a thin string cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestine string that is very dry, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of fine twisted flax then thread the needle and pierce the gut, and sew it up again;
and this manner of sewing up the intestines is not safe except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing or health without subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes open and suppurates, is universally called a "fistula." And likewise, when it becomes closed and heal shut.
And a fistula is according to the green, knotted, hard and white suppuration, where one feels no pain, and is also shaped like a bird's feather;
sometimes they are long and clear, and sometimes thick; sometimes they are small, and sometimes large enough;
I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and there is no scar, except for one of the eight causes;
that is to say, through a small wound in blood vessels or flesh; or due to maliciousness; or because there is a hard lump inside, and on the lips, that does not allow lumps to form; or he has too much bowels; or his skin is porous, and the material of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because the putrefaction is of a pestilential nature; or because of the property of the region, digestion is late, health comes slowly, and it swells by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done by hand.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the face, or intestines, or bladder, or some of the sides, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way, they are of grief sanation, and there is no remedy but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you want to know it, take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, put it on;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a thin, blunt probe because the probe bends with the curvature.
and if the fistula is wide and you cannot probe it well, then cleanse it through one of the openings,
for moisture quickly travels from one orifice to another and purifies.
then you will know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it is deeply embedded.
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you know for sure the location, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or in any of the ways I have told you, the cup according to what I have said to you,
or in any of the ways I have told you, the cup according to what I have said to you, and remove the soiled and rotten clothes that are inside; and then clean the wound until it is healed,
and if the fistula is very deep in a straight line, you must cup it deeply as much as you can, then I apply wet bandages on the medicine to the head of the fistula
then I apply wet bandages on the medicine to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess which remains at the bottom;
and then I apply warming ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away. If a vein or nerve troubles you in your principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then cut it away until all the corruption is removed, then cleanse it with lye water until it is clean;
and if it is not healthy, return it as before, know that you have not gone to the well;
uncover and desire as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus without pain, that is good. if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; and if there is no other way except by the knife;
and if there is a small rotten bone that you can pull out with tweezers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, pull them all out without leaving any behind;
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, pull out the bone from the flesh and moisture.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something on the wound to encourage pus. and let it be until the pus runs around the bone,
and then they will have the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, if you simply treat the infection until the darkness is completely gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of corruption, and it reaches to the bone; if necessary, cut away and cover all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
I will tell you about a fistula which happened to a man on his leg. so that you can take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body,
such that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no cause to open;
but they miraculously worked so much that the abscesses opened and much matter flowed out and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and moisture flowed from the body;
and many had treatment for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine,
as long as I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what ran through the holes with great force; and became red on the bodies of young people, and had a yellow color.
I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then investigated all the openings,
and found that they came together in pairs from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hurried, and struck at one of the openings until I exposed a portion of bone. And found it rotten and pierced, the corruption going right through to the bone within.
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
And began to dress the wound with strong medicines over a long time, but it would not heal.
and then restart, and expose the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I cut it out, and then removed it, and worked to sew up the area;
but I could not reach more than a palm's width into the bone, so I left it half-done, then I treated it with medicine; and it healed and closed up quickly,
and it is not necessary to repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure it, and out of fear of his death which I had for him. For through the evacuation of blood he often bled, but he was completely healed
For through the evacuation of blood he often bled, but he was completely healed and there grew in place of the bone a hard scar, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither in walking nor coming.
and are the head, so that you draw out the corruption below, and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is rotting, so that the rot does not affect the healthy flesh; and put a burning brand or a hot table under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must cut as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and cut again.
And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the break is in the middle or in a part of it, and reveals all the flesh; then put a burning brand underneath,
and then cut from one side of the break to the other, and make the cut as deep as the length of the break, as we have said;
and if the break is in the joint, then cut through the joint and cut out the bone on the other side;
and if the dislocation is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
and if the dislocation is at the base of the hand or the foot, it is very serious, but nevertheless you should inquire into the dislocation, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but do not let the vein or nerve cause you discomfort;
and know that there are many types of knives and scissors for cutting bone, depending on the structure of the bones and the appearance of the teeth. their thickness and thinness, their length and shortness, and their hardness; and for this reason, one must prepare an instrument for each type of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; then prepare the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
by fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external causes;
and when you have treated this corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then you should cover the limb up to the place where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes either by death or, which is worse, by disability due to the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes either by death or, which is worse, by disability due to the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears burnt by fire, and then comes darkness, followed by the腐食 of limb to limb, and spreads throughout the body; so hasten to cover,
and if it is from the sting of venomous beasts, such as scorpions, vipers, and similar creatures,
if the腐食 is on the head, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then the cupping glass at the joint so that the scorching does not reach the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cup at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy for this except in accordance with the quantity of its virtue;
And thus it is done when scorching comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cup after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a blow;
and the way to cut off the limb whether above or below, is that you tie it above and below, and one minister extends one of the lines downstream, and another minister extends the other line upstream, and you loosen the skin that is between the two lines to the width of a finger, as far as the bone is uncovered;
then the thread or silk, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the thread does not touch the healthy area, and bring about another injury and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the site aggressively, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
there happened to him a darkness which looked like a burn from fire,
and this corrosion came first in his right foot, until it affected the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot and it healed;
and long after that, the corrosion returned in his hand, and he came to me,
and I put on things that cause reverberation after cleansing the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
and he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I had hope of reverberating the matter; and I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and he wrapped his hand, and was healed;
I have not included the translation of this line as it is not part of the text you provided for translation.
At times, an abscess forms in a fleshy area and persists so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. Then they open and discharge, and the area remains hollow, just as with vessels. and the skin on top is as thin as a loose napkin, and it does not reach the bone or the nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy',
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it is called 'fistula'.;
and cook it so you wrap the hide all around, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth; and do not worry about its spoilage.
And if you are worried that the hide will rot, and the spoilage is not complete, and the hide is thick with flesh, then treat it thus:
examine whether the breasts are swollen, and if there is a foul-smelling discharge from them. then administer the Egyptian medicated enema made as follows: take alum, oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and mix them together, heating the mixture in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as an enema on the breast, and constrict the orifice; and let the medication remain inside for about two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
do this as many times as necessary until the breast is deflated and the swelling has gone down;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water and ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should grind vine wood to ashes, and pour water over it,
then strain it, and use it as a clyster until you see that the bowels are cleaned out.
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the water and ashes, if he enemas with water and honey or if he has a little litarge powder; or you can enema him with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine causes sweating;
and when you have done this, and you trust that the intestines are well cleaned, if the enema is of that which causes flatulence within him,
and you should press gently on the orifice, and apply ointment, mixed with rose oil and wine; or you can use an enema of certain medicines or ointments, whose properties I have described in the section on ointments;
and if the opening of the rectum is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, if you widen it with an iron instrument a little, and put in some of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened enough;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave only enough room for the catheter to enter,
and if the anus is above, then the incision should be made higher up, closer to where it is. For when the bowels are full, one must not eat food. and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare in such a way that the bowels go to the lowest place they are,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare in this way: let the bowstring run lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowstring; and take consolidating medicine to put on the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press hard on the opening of the breast. It should be a bit larger than the first one. then apply a soothing ointment on another piece of fabric according to the size of the opening, and place it over the breast opening to soothe the bowels, and do not remove the large bandage until several days have passed;
and the one who is over the breast opening, remove often to soothe the bowels, and know what flows from the bowel, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when the medicine has spread in this way and you see that the nature of the wound on the breast if you know that the breast is open and approaching healing;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change a different cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows strongly after many days, you can be sure that the breast will not dry up. And if subtle poisons spread after a long time, do not despair of your health,
for the saints are drawing near. For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and others who heal quickly.
and if a lump in the breast does not disappear after many days, know that it will not go away on its own;
and if the breasts are slow to dry up, and are distant, then apply medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as an ointment containing vitriol, for it is the best medicine.
take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rose wine of equal substance.
then cook it and use it; and in the same way, make cooked honey thickener when a definite ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them up into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; and then apply a poultice and place it over the chest, and sometimes administer a long arystologus, and roots of the celestial lily, which is like flour of vetch and centaury;
and roots of the celestial lily, which is like flour of vetch and centaury; and use simple or composite herbs: grind them into powder, and place them on the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is complete, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the limbs, or in the tissues; if the treatment of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the nail abscess
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps it grows in other parts of the body;
and when it is infected and left untreated, an abscess forms; and they grow and rot until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they rot the entire nail;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe becomes swollen, and the colour is yellow.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help you must cut off all the excess which is hanging from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to point, and the blister, then you should put the thread under the nail that is pointing at the flesh, and pull it upwards gently and slowly, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medications to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the tooth corrupt, pull it out as previously described, then treat the boil until it is healed;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first; then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally from above,
and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, apply something to soothe it.
You must adjust that which is born in the hands of some men by chance, and is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and sometimes only nails,
and some are born at the base of the joint, where the growth is in one of the fingers. Those who are born with a hernia in their groin should not move, and those who are born with a hernia at the junction of the groin, by chance may move;
the size of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint, if you hold it tight.
In him who is born where the anus should be, you must first press the flesh around the bone. Then press the bone with a suitable instrument, then treat it until it is healed.
The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or by similar things.
Then you must treat this wound so that the bones heal according to their natural shape. then place between two tent or damp cloth soaked in rose oil, so that it does not clot; or you can place between two thin pieces of wood, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
If a person with a sore palm comes to you, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
Of the poor
Fists are large, wrapped vesicles full of melancholy humors that come from various parts of the body;
and they occur more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in other people.
Therefore, you should administer to him an emetic, and then the basil drink.
There are two methods of treatment with fire. One is to cut and draw out the black blood; The other method is to open a vein and draw it all out.
The incision is performed in the following manner: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are made smaller. Then, press the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two or three places, with a wide cut,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood into your hand from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to drink possets of black wine;
and repeat the bleeding and purging when the veins are full, and ease the patient's pain.
The treatments for dislocation are as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it by fire, and then apply the hot compress directly to the vein from the top of the ankle down to the knee, or in the area below the ankle;
then open the skin at the joint, and scorch the vein on each side, until it appears when one feels it;
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears as a white cord.
then it goes under the skin until it is elevated, and then it can be easily removed with tweezers,
then cut into another area above the vein in three places; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up with tweezers, as you have done before, and remove it with another pair of tweezers, as you did before;
then cut another strip, or several if you need them, then lift it, and place it on the bottom of the foot
then pull and lift it up to the second strip; then pull it out from strip to strip, until it comes all the way out, then cut it.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong doubled thread through it. Tie it and pull it, and insert a needle under it, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. and make sure it doesn't pop out, for if it pops out, one cannot milk or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have finished milking, place on the site of the wound a damp cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
And if the shoulder is contracted, crooked and wrapped together, not straight as we have said, you should split it crookedly but not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said.
you should split it crookedly but not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the knife with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not cut unless it touches the vein.
and it has a large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is angular in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and occasionally they grow elsewhere than on the legs; and this happens due to a pustule that forms under the skin,
just as snakes and worms enter the body between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just as the root of a plant.
When the head is exposed, you must wrap it around with a piece of linen one and a half yards long, and tie it.
and leave the linen hanging down to the leg, and every time he feels a discharge, wrap it around again with the linen, and tie it. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around, and do not cover the root at all until it is completely discharged. For if you cover it, it will enter the body and cause abscesses and pustules in that place, and a serious illness.
it must be treated little by little until it reaches the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and sometimes this vein is treated from five to ten inches long, or more, and once a man came to me whose vein was as long as ten inches, and when you cut it, it gushed out like a spring, and penetrated all the way to the bone,
so that all the matter inside is drained out, and then apply healing medicines for several days, just as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and from which it shoots out blood; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen:
and there is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and travels through the body going up and down, and can be felt moving from one part of the body to another until it breaks through the skin where it is going, and jumps out;
and is caused by certain humors, like worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly;
and one suspects its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled, one cannot hold back tears when he sees it:
so you must tie the area above and below with a strong string, tied tightly,
then cut it on top and pull it out hard, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you do not release it, if you cauterize with fire above it, until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then press firmly under the eyebrow, then pull upwards and out.
It is necessary to use a cleansing agent for the body with medicinal solutions to draw out the bad humours,
and from foods that cause constipation.
Of the pain that comes from wind. This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, and can move from one part of the body to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything else, as bright and lively as silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and moved to the shoulder,
and then a little later ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm;
then she started to turn around the body, just as I saw her.
I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this illness behave in that way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain moving from one place to another, but I have not seen it in a woman;
and I thought it was because women had dry skin and uncovered veins, and for this reason the wind is forced out.
And they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist skin and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, examine it thoroughly above and below, then press on until that windiness is forced out of its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the remedy for those windinesses, like foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the place in the body where they land.
The diversity of their heads is such that there are those with large points, small ones, smooth ones, and serrated ones. and those who have .ij. angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and that which falls in any member falls according to .ij. ways: or in the principal member falls,
as brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder and similar organs. When it therefore falls in any of these members, and the sign of death which I will tell you about later becomes apparent to you:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterward in many cases. And when this bad sign is not apparent and the arrow is not deeply lodged, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the spinal fluid leaks out from above the brain, is when there is vomiting and vomiting of blood, and blackness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps this happens without blood coming from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and there is moisture coming out of the wound like pus, and also like blood;
and if these signs appear, then cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck.
The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced into something hard, and not hollow; and occasionally the patient becomes mute like the poultry, and turns pale with black blood, and experiences chilliness and cold sweat, and faints: then know without a doubt that death is imminent.
And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the body is foam without pain, emerging from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and gasping for breath and seeking the cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the groin area, between the ribs; and it causes great pain and suffering, and gasping; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
And if an arrow pierces the heart or stomach, by chance something indigestible may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, there is no hope for a cure nor for extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, buttock, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him in the root of his nose: I probed it and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without pain.
And I extracted an arrow that had struck him in the fatty tissue under the eyeball, below the eyelid: and the arrow had been removed, but only the tip was protruding from the wood. and the arrow was large, shot from a Turkish bow, and had a broad head without ears; the player was unharmed, and no ill fate befell him.
He then shot an arrow at a Christian's throat, and the arrow had Arabic writing on it with ears:
I cut off their beards and throttled them until I killed them, and the Christians were unharmed.
And I drew an arrow from a man who had it in his head or belly, and thought he would die;
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, and removed it, and he had no bad reaction.
And if you see a man who has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up over it;
and left the arrow inside him, and did not change his natural dispositions, nor found harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
And drew an arrow from the king's head, where it was lodged in the brain, and was somewhat inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely drawn out
I was called to attend after she had been healed for three days. I found the wound much improved.
I examined her thoroughly and found no trace of it; and he felt a pricking and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrow
I placed a cooling and digestive plaster on the spot, because the ears were swollen; and I saw the tip of the arrow.
and I saw the tip of the arrow. I applied the ointment repeatedly, re-opened the wound directly, and kept the patient's condition for a long time.
until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so. I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound repeatedly, as long as it was open,
and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which protruded from the wound; then adjusted in the opening of the wound by that medicine water, so that the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly;
and surpassed the boundaries within four months,
and then I opened the wound with tweezers, and squeezed it from both sides, but it would not come out;
so I continued to subtlely and skillfully use tools in various ways, until one day I took well-made tweezers, According to what his condition will be at the end of this chapter, as I have described it, and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on that which I do not say, for books cannot understand everything;
but the wise masters understand little about very few things, and what they do know is only what is present and lacking, they discover new works, and nine instruments, and the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are lodged in two ways: or through the place they enter, or elsewhere;
and those that come out through the place they entered, are arrows entering the flesh, and sometimes they come out now.
And if it does not come out now, let it be left until the flesh around it is rotted away, and the passageway is cleared;
and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, let it be left for several days, moving it a little each day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a very thin stick until the area around it is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body so that it cannot be seen, then look for it throughout the body; and if you feel it, then treat it with an appropriate instrument.
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut it so that the wound is large enough; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears in the arrowhead to which it is attached,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears in the arrowhead to which it is attached, if you pull the hair that is stuck in the wound with tweezers as much as you can and then bend or twist the head of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;
and then bend or twist the head of the arrow, so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot extract it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding area becomes swollen; then pull it out, for extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes it contrary, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and guard against cutting the nerve and opening a vein, and use any means you can to draw out the arrow without danger,
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and adjust the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid you can provide; and if you cannot, then adjust him according to what the signs show you.
Arrows which come from another direction, where something sticks out of them, or the skin is swollen in the affected area, either seen or felt:
Cut above it, as far as the forceps can reach, and then extract it; if it does not come out immediately, cut again.
And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out;
and if there is an arrow in it, then plug up the entire shaft.
and if the shaft is broken, and you see a need to administer relief, then administer .i. instrument chewed, so that the point of the arrow enters into the gum of the instrument; and then plug it out,
and if the arrow is chewed, then plug in .i. instrument with a point entering in, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow has touched the skin, then you must cup around the entire area where the venom is, as much as you can. then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or stomach, or belly, or bladder, or side, and it is superficial, and you can cup over it, then cup over it.
and be careful not to cup the vein and nerve, and then pull out the arrow, and then cut the wound, if necessary. and treat until healed.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
veins of the common body: Veins from which one is healed are .xxx, from which it has in the head xvi.,
Here is the translation: and the two arteries in the two temples, which are visible; and two veins that are in the two corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is in the head of the penis; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips on the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augerich"; and 2 veins that are under the tongue
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
the one is cephalic, and is on the left side, and people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle vein is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and people call it  "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and people call it  "vein of the belly", and it is above the bladder, and is that which heals, which is clearly visible above the scrotum.
And the salvatrix is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
In the leg there are three veins: one is under the fold of the scrotum on the left side, and the second superficial vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
and three veins beneath these.
The bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with emigration [of the eye]. And the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
And the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strangle the patient's neck with a rope, that the .ii. veins appear behind the ears, descending from the head in two places: so you will feel the pulse underneath your toe, and if it hurts when you press on it;
then take the lance, and pierce under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand up along the vein; and cut through the skin and vein well .ii. times through, and let the blood out until you see it;
then I stretch and tie it, until it is healed
and I have already spoken of incisions and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples, which is good for old migraines, and for sore eyes and accustomed tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of the surgeon are as I say: and the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels pain under your jaw, and then sign here;
then gently press the vein above your index finger, and insert the lance below, and open the vein at the top, and the scrotum, as you have done in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then ligate it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and extraction in the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the frontal vein is as good as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and when the quality is such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "forceps", which has this form:
and place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want. then loosen the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is healthy and sometimes use a large flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp, and the wound should not be too deep, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames might break when they are thin.
The wounds of the two veins that are in the two arms help themselves, and also the tinea, and the redness, and the orifice in the eye, and the diseases of the face.
And their quality is that the patient turns his neck to the side by twisting some ligament, as before.
Then he cuts it, and it should be cut across, with the flame a little long and wide, for there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance it will break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
The bleeding from the vein in the nose is good for nosebleeds, and sudden fainting, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts his neck, then he pulls his nose to the left hand, and take the thin flame, long and narrow, and insert it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily, and the blood will begin to flow.
and do not go in too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it up for a night, for it is quickly restored.
The healing of the two testicles helps with the contraction of the anus, and with the beginning of menstruation, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with ulcers.
and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck back and forth, as we have said. and let the doctor stand above the patient's head, and the patient lie on his back.
then open the vein a little widely, then draw the blood in a tempered way, or as much as is needed.
then do another turn on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently constrict both veins. let the patient not be strangled by it; and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
On bleeding from the lips Bleeding from the veins of the lips above helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain in the jaw.
And the quality of the healing is to have the patient sit before you, and tighten his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and know them by their being black, and by there being around them fine black veins; then cut both of them, and if you do not know which to cut and are in doubt,
then cut both of them, and if you do not know which to cut and are in doubt, take the thickest of each part, and do likewise with the .ii. veins above and below, for it is one and the same procedure.
On bleeding under the tongue: Bleeding the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is useful for tightening the throat, and for diseases of the gullet and mouth.
and the qualities of the bleeding are such that the patient should hold his hands in front of the sun, and stick out his tongue, and look underneath each side for a black vein.
Then cleanse both of them and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
either with a single large silver needle or a thin olive-shaped one with a pointed tip, and it is called «anesil»; and they are wide and slender according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame martin is very renowned, and it is broad as you can see.
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and filled with thick blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood. and it is the shape of the olive flame:
and is more pointed and is for bleeding subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen.
And it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed the basilic vein, and be wary of the artery underneath it. And if he pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then he should stanch it as I have said. and must not pierce the vein, but cut it like an onion.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if the basil doesn't open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another; or you can tie some of it off, or you can heal the vein in its place in the arm: it will open clearly; and apply the cautery to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to know the location of the bleeding, then you must also stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the pulse; then sign the place with a cut, then tie the arm, and press the vein with the flame of the cautery;
and beware of cutting into the artery when you see it swelling, for that is an artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it rising upwards as urine does in a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: then hurry and place your finger over it firmly, then remove your finger if the blood stops, for this often happens;
It is tied to the arm, and left thus, and the patient should not move it, nor move when it is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds and there is no medicine present, then compress the artery where it is cut off, and stop the flow of blood.
And take a piece of fir, and split it, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then stop it with a cauterisation, as we have said before, using powders which stop bleeding.
and the bandages are not wrapped in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding from a vein in the middle if it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply and to find the nerve that is underneath, and it swells and the saint is distressed, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you should heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid the nerve as much as you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it from the long one.
The sainie of the Cephalic helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and one must open it with a cautery to the olive flame or the myrrh flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerve nor artery beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and if one misses it the first time, one should try again. and sometimes veins will swell for some men, when one misses the first time, but it does no harm. The quality of the bloodletting depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is not used only to restore health.
and to prevent future illnesses; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: these are the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating when the signs of digestion are apparent;
and one must bleed the patient the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding administered to the sick has no set time, but when there is need by day or by night, at all hours and at all times;
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus until the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should the very old be bled who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wishes to cleanse themselves, in whatever way, they must empty the intestines with a gentle enema, if there is fecal matter retained, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines to the principal members.
Neither should one cleanse themselves who is too full of food, nor who is drunk, until they have digested their food and are no longer intoxicated.
and if one wishes to cleanse after a colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive sexual activity, or from exertion, staying up all night, fasting, or any other activity that weakens the body.
then subtly draw out the humours, if the illness is severe, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter a bath, if nothing else works, to subtly draw out the blood,
and cure the vein of the foot, around the third, as we have said;
and beware on that day of hard work, and piercing, and lust, and similar things;
and be tied and bound, and let the bandage be higher than that of the person being treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
then loosen the ligature above the wound, for if it is too loose or too tight, it cannot heal.
Then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
Then dampen the bandage with a little old oil, then put his index finger of his left hand on the wound under the area he wants to treat, that the vein does not burst upon being cut. For there are veins that flow like cords to the heart, and others filled with wind. So, if one places it over the flame, it draws in the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with some of them.
And if the vein opens, the wound is too tight, so one must be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then try again a little lower at the site of the vein or above it, unless the area is swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient feels hopeless, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. By chance, there will be hot abscesses; do not enter into a bath, then start bleeding again if she wishes.
And if the opening is small, cut into it with a sharp knife and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you want, then pierce that same opening directly with a hot iron.
and work on it a little gently, so that the wound is not inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area inflamed, do not re-open the wound, and put on a little linseed oil, because it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil that the linseed is made from is useful.
and so use linseed oil in any wound you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this also makes a триачле and bowels of eus, when it is put on the area; so subtlety the blood and splits when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when the wound is not healed but rather small, if you have a rush, and put on the spot a sponge wet in water and salt slightly warm, and hold it for an hour;
and you should do this after the release of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or greenish color, it will not harm him; and if you see, put on something made of aloe or myrrh dissolved in wine, medicine, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the exit of the basilic vein: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore be careful not to put anything on it from what we have said, because sometimes it cuts through an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are full and swollen, and need bloodletting, that one makes them a larger wound, and the flames should be wide.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled a little and often, and one must bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from the long or the wide vein.
And for those whose body needs bleeding, one should give them wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are feverish, they should be bled three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, he should eat before bleeding soft bread dipped in mucilaginous syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and aniseed, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints after the flow of much blood, then he should inhale the steam of warm broth and subtle, scented syrup.
and use the other remedies we have described in the chapter on syncope, for opening a vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by a large bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wishes to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong pulses, then heal for .vii. hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed from another part, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
For there is a great deal of blood within the body which has become heated, and it brings on fever; therefore one must draw out a large quantity, and widen the orifice so that it drips onto a sponge; then you must observe all the conditions of bleeding, and place your hand on their pulse when they are bleeding so that death does not come in the place of a sponge, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
and you must not, when you see the arm coming loose and blood coming out a second time, and the wound is closed, press directly on it; nor, if it is crooked, should he stretch out his arm forcefully, for that would be bad;
but let him leave it until it heals the second time; or you put it to the point of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the wound's opening flows out, and put on .I. poultice of celandine, and press it gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it until the abscess is drained.
And if it's necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein near the shoulder because it is closer to the heart.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the fingernails turn red;
then he should be left briefly, so that the vein appears well, then he is healed now through the middle, not from the broad or long side;
and the incision should be made wide, and he is healed close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because there is more in winter than in summer;
and the bleeding from this vein is safer than any other vein, because there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The bleeding to save the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is how:
Hold the hand tightly, and pour in warm water until the vein is swollen, as one sees it; and if it bleeds sideways, and you bandage it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are all stripped of flesh beneath,
then put the hand in warm water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have treated the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
The treatment for the sore throat is good for all illnesses below the neck. such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of its treatment is that the patient puts their foot in warm water, and rubs the sore until it bursts. and if the sore is at the ankle, and the swelling goes up above the foot, there are many diseases of the kidneys;
let them walk in the sun or in the open air, or go barefooted, as they please.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves underneath, and heal it by crossing also as in cupping; and let the flames be mild.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot into water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing does not work the first time, then try again a second time on top of it, for the place is salty; doubt not to use a nerve, as we have said, and likewise do with the other foot equally.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is for pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And its qualities are such that the patient should enter the bath and twist above the ankle four times in alternation,
for otherwise it will not open; and if it opens, then remedy it in every way you can, by crossing over and and it is better to cut it off, for the head is safe, and she is very relaxed in many men's hands.
and it is better to cut it off, for the head is safe, and she is very relaxed in many men's hands. And if you do not believe it, then cut a vein on the inside of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as you wish, then untie the ligature and place cotton on it and tighten it; she is now healed.
Of bleeding with leeches:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Suctions cups are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this suction without striking is in two ways: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
and two others on either side of the neck; and a cupping glass under the chin; and cupping glasses on the shoulders; and cupping glasses over the hips; and cupping glasses between the two arms; and cupping glasses between the two legs; and cupping glasses on the ankles; and if no blood is drawn except from small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and therefore one weakens it not at all, as is done with bleeding of a vein; and one must not administer it, neither with any fire nor with burning, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if because of necessity of diseases one must blister, or because of habits, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between each season.
For there are some who, when they have need to blister, have a heavy head;
and if they experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who spit up blood, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed profusely; and if there are those who faint, and see blackness, and become weak and die, and experience similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours of the day.
The bleeding of the nose helps the headache that comes from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this farting is in place of the bleeding of the head,
and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cool-headed diseases.
And those who heal often become blind, and because of this, one must place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of blindness.
The location for cupping on the neck is at the junction of the skull and the basilic vein, and because of this, it is useful for constriction of the feet. and for fissures in the gullet, and for toothache, and for bloating;
and one must press it only lightly, because if it holds too tightly, it causes blindness or stomach ache and heart pain.
The wind's ventilation through the .ij. ribs of the neck is good for the pains in the head, and ophthalmia and eye-waterings, and for strangulation, and for toothache at the roots.
and it is in the place of bleeding from the basilic vein; and you must instruct the bleeder to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not grasp the artery and cause a gushing of blood.
Ventilation under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from those large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, because underneath there are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass which is placed on the hip is as good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of copper, and have a strong suction; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
The leg cupping-glasses heal very apparently, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the legs, and in the hips, and in the bladder; and bring back the period, and are placed on the two sciatic nerves and the two ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
The manner of applying the cupping-glass is to place it first empty, and suck gently, and apply it firmly, and move equally, and not cease doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cupping-glasses, and take heed in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have such thin skin and wide pores: therefore only strike once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est clers et espés, si convient ferir  .iiij. fois soulement.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we open the vein frequently; and if the blood is thick, then heat it until it flows, and the terminations are such that the heart is pierced suddenly,
and it is fitting for those with thick and tough skin, and those with tight pores, that you grease the places where the cupping glasses will be placed with a warming and dissolving oil: if it is on the neck, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is on the liver, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or of balsamite, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
And if one is healing tender flesh with large pores, then no oil should be applied,
but after venting, they should wash with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large swellings rise from old wine, or from water of soap, or from a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things.
and should not be bled with a cupping-glass before the bath or emetic, but after; and should not sleep after cupping,
and it is good that he should fast when he is to be bled, and when he has been bled. And beware if the patient is choleric and the blood is too hot and inflamed; if he should press cold things, like pomegranates and endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and eat little, and meat broth, and moist foods.
And those of a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old and new wine, and meat broth, and little birds and pigeons;
and on the day he is bleeding, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people musk or civet before or after wind-letting, to strengthen the main members; and dilute the wine, but those who are hot tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are used without bleeding are those that are used on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the scrofula, and on the belly and the armpit, and the rain, and the hip, because these members do not tolerate being bled on the eyes,
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place cups on the breasts when they are swollen to reduce the swelling in the member, so we place cups on the belly and armpit to make the member smaller.
and it relieves the pain when there is gangrene or a stone, and by its attractive power, the gangrene is removed, or the stone leaves its place.
And thus it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
and these cups are administered empty to suck only slightly; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as with diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cup to be administered with fire is as follows:
And it has 2 fingers in width and a half palm in depth, and it has on each side around the middle a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl,
and it should be made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and have in the middle a twisted rod of iron or steel to hold a candle
and both large and small according to the illnesses and ages of those who take them;
because children's leeches are different from adults', and lean people's different from fat people's.
And it should thus be placed on the member:
take the candle of wax or .i. lining, and put it inside the suction cup through the tube which is inside the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the hole that we have described, so that when one wishes, the vapors will go in and the suction cup can be removed;
and they take the lining as before, and do it repeatedly if necessary.
Therefore the cupping glass which is applied in case of dropsy, with any acute disease, has no tube or opening, and is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb alone;
and this is the form:
Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on naked flesh, such as testicles or nipples, and other similar places;
and its use is such that when you find leeches in clean, fresh water without mud, then take them.
place them in clean, fresh water until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; then cleanse the wound with a vein-opening poultice and a cupping glass, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
and when they are swollen and biting, if there is a vein nearby where a cupping glass can be placed, then do so, for it is much better.
If not, then lift the place with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out.
And if the bite is too low on the body of the snake, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it there until the fang is extracted;
And if the fangs are multiple, then apply ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until they are extracted;
Or you can place half a pod of split peas on the site and leave them until they dry out, which will stop the bleeding now;
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the spot with fresh blood, or stick a needle into it until the leech attaches. Then place them on the wound, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach;
and when you see them excrete, sprinkle some powdered aloes and salt, or ash on the wound, and they will stop bleeding soon after.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish multitude are ignorant of this chapter, and have never read any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I found no good ones.
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge gained from ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have attained to a knowledge of them, and by experience, and by the habits of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarised it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue to this book that the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or a broken bone occurs in anyone, you should hasten to treat the patient from both sides, if nothing else holds them back, such as weakness of body, or youth, or old age;
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold joints of meat, and venison and kid, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess, or the spread of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their first treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, pigs' feet, pig's belly, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. Because with more swelling the break will be closed more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and the feeble cannot heal well or join together according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
But have no worry, reset it on the broken bone, specifically the large tendons which stretch and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and do not cut off any part of his work, and for this reason he needs to eat lots of meat, as we have said.
And know that fractures come in many forms and manners.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
And each type has its own method, and its own proper instrument for healing, according to what memory comes in its place.
And it is known that the break of the bone is due to the twisting of the limb, and it is apparent by discolouration, and sounds when pressed by the hand;
And when there is no twisting or sound upon pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can have tortuosity, or split, or small fracture. You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow, and then hold it firmly but gently.
And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together evenly, just as in an abscess;
and if the abscesses are hot, let it rest for a day or two, until the abscesses are soothed; then you make it even with the muscle that you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of that in which there are pieces; then you hold it, as appropriate next.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, it is stretched from two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you bring them back together by any means you can, and be careful that your action does not cause the patient injury or pain;
and adjust well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And you can feel it with your hand if it doesn't seem right; then dress it nicely, and don't pull or press too hard as those do who bring about hot abscesses and contractions in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is healed, then caution the patient well that he doesn't move it, nor while awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure to guard against any pain in the limb. For when there is no pain, it is not yet healed, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
For when there is no pain, it is not yet healed, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and make sure it is put back correctly so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
You should know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
Because there are small members, such as fingers and toes and similar: you should wrap these with soft, fine linen.
and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: these should be wrapped with a broad and firm bandage, because broad bandages embrace the entire limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that there is no swelling.
then wind around it lightweight bandages, 3 or 4 turns depending on the limb, and tighten the hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and loosen it less than the fracture, so that the fracture is moved away a little.
and soften the bandage little by little as you press on most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it directly over the broken area.
then go to the area under the fracture and constrict it slightly, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said above in the first bandage.
put between the lines of flax or cloth until it is all even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage, and then put your stars well made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something to soothe the abscess that is warm and reduces the swelling, and leave it like that for a few days;
then put your stars under the bandage, and they should be of a medium size made of linen, or wooden sticks like those used for making clothes smooth, or palm leaves, and they should be in this shape:
but the star that is put on the dislocation should be a bit bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it needs to be for the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it tightly against the bones just as you did at first, then tie a thread around it in the same way as before on the fracture;
the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should not be too thin or too thick, but of soft linen;
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen foolish people make their laces with twisted cords, and this is a great error, for the lace will not be even if it is too thin, and there should be no more than a finger's width between each bone.
And if the patient is weak after the stretching in their healthy arms, then place beneath them a pad of linen or other soft cloth so that they do not hurt themselves.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for it later.
And know that one should not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the member is large, it should not be dislocated until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess;
and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: you take the flour that is held on the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and twist: take 3 parts of barley and ladani and enule and assafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechil 7 parts; and grind them into powder, and mix with plenty of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Another way of plaster that is useful for twists: take mastic and balm of gilead, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 8 parts; acacia 6 parts; armenic bole 10 parts, and grind well, and cook with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and for bones out of their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and shrink the swelling: take fresh lard, and cook it in garlic and oil, and apply it to the affected area. These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and relieving pain.
Another method of ointment that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthworm leaves, and crush them together, and make an ointment.
Another method of ointment for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce swelling of an abscess: take marsh-mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; crush and cook with wine. If the member is inflamed, cook with moist coriander water or water and use it.
Another method of ointment that is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marsh-mallow roots, and flax seed, borage, melilot, and comfrey, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; crush and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Hypocras writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair shaved off, or bird feathers, and honey, and mix them together, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it again in a few days.
And if pain comes in the area, or itching, or discomfort, or swelling, act quickly and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place a dry cloth over it, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure the abscess is hot.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and alleviate its pain, then restart the gentle binding, and use a little ointment, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and be subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it in the same way as before.Et se li maux sont jai osté dou tout, et li membra sont jai sane, si ne fitz mie ren de la lieure ne de l’emplaustre; mes s’il est encores dolor, et enfleure, et roujor, si fitz ren come tu a fait avant.
And if there is nothing of what we have said coming to the member, then do not remove it until after 3, 4, or 5 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, depending on how the fracture is healing and approaching the bone underneath.Et si li maux ne vient encores, et le membre est encores infirme, si fitz ren come tu as fait premierement, et tant que le membre est jai enflé et roux, et dolor;
then restrain him more than before, and increase his food, as I have said before. And if you see the place drier than it should be, know that no healing can come from it. then give him a hot water enema, each time you loosen him, and do this every other day, and ease the pressure a little.
through this work, the healing comes to the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish do, who restore the limb crookedly: it is evil, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing in it but laziness and doing it properly.
of the various methods of breaking There are many types of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinct.
Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the collarbone all the way to the shoulder blade underneath, as with an axe or staff; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without breaking it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; the wound from these two types of fractures is large or small.
And if there is a deep impact, or a split or blow from a stone, or falling on stone, or other similar occurrences.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if it has a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if it has a wound that is lodged in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called a "capillary" fracture;
and if the wound is made by stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and it drives the bone fragment inward, and the site of the injury is hairy like the hair on a potter's wheel when they work on the pots; then it enters the bone below.
And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in their heads, like children's skulls;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged as they are, and I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction upon them and the examination at night, and by the foul smell that is upon it.
The hairline fracture is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it, the black crack appears.
In the treatment of fractures, take care of the accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and palpitations, and fever, and eyes popping out and turning red, and others similar in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see a miraculous event, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the tissue underneath the foreskin does not decay and cause the problems we have described.
And if the break in the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the damaged part: and it is necessary that you grip the head of the wounded person, and expose above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if blood flows when uncovering the bone, or a wound is caused, aid it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with moistened strips of cloth in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and you are sure there is no more blood flow; then begin to remove around the bone, and this can be done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut with a close-fitting bandage in front, and this is the shape
And then put on another bandage larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have various bandages, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you should pierce around it, so that you administer cauteries with needles, not so deep that they penetrate through the bone of the skull, and it should have a rim or ring above the point, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each comes in its place into the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all the holes; and this is the shape of the three types of needles:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the needle somewhere else a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space between the holes with knives, as thinly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or with some of the instruments that you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is necessary that you cut away the membrane that is left on the bone with some instrument like an incisive knife, but it should be more thin and flexible than the other knives.
And if there is anything left of the small bones or any chips, remove them lightly with one of these instruments; then heal the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen speaks of, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his words are: First, you must uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and moving; then, when you have uncovered that part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has a curved shape.
Do not cut in from the side, but make an incision in the middle of the bone, so that the cutting edge is facing the bone. Then strike it gently with a small mallet, so that you nudge the bone all around gently, and be careful of the membrane underneath.
If it is loose from the bone, then nudge the bone gently, for there is no pain or fear in nudging the bone.
And if the break in the bone does not go all the way through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then you should re-examine that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp, of which you must have several quantities, to use in each place the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the break.
First use the coarse rasps, then the finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
In each of the other subtle hairline fractures and breaks, you should treat them according to their nature; and this is not a matter that can be fully explained to one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the sinus is exposed, you should cover it with a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of linen, doubled over twice or thrice, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can so that you don't aggravate the ulcer, then apply another bandage on top, and don't tighten it more than is necessary to hold the dressing in place.
and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then remove it and apply medicine made from lilies, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these ingredients and apply it to the wound, and then administer other medicines without biting;
and take care that the wound is clean and that you don't leave any ointment or pus on it, because when pus collects under the skin's surface, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to an ulcer, it causes hardening on top.
Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
And if discoloration does not come from the medicine that has been applied, because it has such a virtue, then you should take some honey and mix in three parts rose oil, and stick to a bandage, and place it on the ulcer; then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
You should know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your index finger or thumb over the nose, and put the break inside your finger according to its natural shape, and hold it there with pressure until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is above the elbow and the bone cannot be put in place, then you should place it evenly at the top of a fairly thick rod.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have healed, then attach to the top of the elbow a tent made of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one from each side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the bones.
And some say that one must soak the bandages in butter, and change them every day. I do not think this is good, but they should be soaked while preparing egg white and flour; then leave the bandage until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of bandages, and on top a silk cloth; and the patient holds it in place, and breathes among them; do as you wish.
And if there are abscesses on the nose while you are doing this, put cerotic ointment or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilone.
And if no pus comes out, then put a plaster on it, made from flour of linseed, and powdered incense, cooked in egg white, then put over it light wicks, and do not bind it too tightly.
And if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound, and heal it with healing substances, warm, as in plasters and ointments appropriate to this purpose;
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then heal it with tents, and put in splinters of oak, until it is healed.
from the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is fully dislocated and there is no external wound, and only the joint is dislocated, not broken in two where the corbel sits inside, then it is easily recognized.
If the dislocation is on the right side, you should place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left side, then use the index finger of your right hand, and push the joint gently back into place, and adjust it evenly with the other hand.
And if the joint of the jaw is displaced to one side, you should administer an extension of one part, until it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or dislocation, then bind it with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put a cerote on the jaw, and put a double drape over it; and place a large, well-shaped splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put plaster on top of it, made from powdered millstone with egg white or flour, after removing the cerate; and then apply another light plaster on top, and if the plasters adhere, and the condition of the malady does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in 3 weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flames according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
of the foreskin The foreskin can tear in many ways, toward the shoulder, and there are three types of tears: one where it is torn and separated into two pieces, which is the lightest injury to treat; another where there is a tear with a wound; and lastly, where the entire foreskin is torn off, which is the most serious injury.
And the procedure for when there is no wound with the tear is to have two attendants, one of whom holds the shoulder where the foreskin is torn, and the other stretches the neck toward the affected area; then, using your fingers, bring the torn edges together so that they are aligned, with no gaps or overlaps.
And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow of cloth or wool, as thick as necessary; and hold it lightly in your hand, and press the pillow with your hand so that you make the break even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of joint because it is dislocated, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant should press the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then stretch the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you should split it open; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then cut one of the incisions that you have made larger, but place this instrument under the shoulder to guard against the synovial sac:
and is shaped like a spoon, and is not hollow, and is as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; and has .ij. edges, so that one is wide and the other narrow, just as the cut that you have made when you pulled the bones apart.
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt the hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and dressings according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes out, moisten a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is that you place on the bone an ointment made from mill-powder and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and if necessary, place a ball under the shoulder. Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then place a double bandage on the ointment, and then take a thin cloth six inches wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage is hanging loose. and put the splint over the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy collarbone, and under the affected collarbone; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligament is holding the break in place properly, and you clearly see that the splint is not moving on the broken bone, then release him each day, and when the ligature becomes loose, restrain him again.
and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, put a small pillow under the collarbone to raise the shoulder; this will lighten the break in the clavicle by loosening the shoulder, or you can bind his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless an evil accident happens, up to 20 days.
Then resume the poultice if you see that he still needs it, and restrain him like this until he is healed; and it is usually healed within 28 days, but in some people less than that.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Then it happens that the shoulder breaks or widens in the middle, and one feels it only by touch; then prepare the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then put flour from the mill with plenty of egg on the site, and light tampons, and place a double drape over it; then put a wide and thin board over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is any swelling under the board on the shoulder, use that part of the swelling with linen tampons so that the board lies flat; and then tightly bind it with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and whenever it softens, bind it again, and adjust the board if it has moved, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and not underneath the heart, pierce and open the bone, and do what we have said about the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and there is a lack of strength, and swelling, and perhaps vomiting of blood, and the cracks in the broken bone become visible, and he feels great pain.
And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together and brings his ribs closer together with his hands, carefully ensuring they are even on both sides, so that the bone is in the correct position; then he applies poultices and bandages made from fine salt or some other light material over the fracture, wrapping it in a cloth and securing it to the broken bone so it does not move; and he winds the ligature around the back again, tightening it gently, and checks every hour whether it has loosened, and if it has, he tightens it; and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that has come over the area, or pain or an abscess, then he should do so promptly, removing the poultice and addressing the issue with appropriate treatments; then he reapplies the poultice and bandages, tightening them until it is healed.
about the breaking of ribs:
You should know that rib fractures only occur in the thick part near the back, and in the front, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
And the restoration is that you put the break in place, as it should be. And then apply the ointment, and hold it in place with a bandage if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is bent inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; they also have difficulty breathing, and cough up and vomit a large amount of blood, which indicates a grave condition, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not agree that hot poultices should be applied if they have not already been used. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some say that cupping is done on the affected area to draw out impurities, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping may attract impurities to the site due to weakness.
And some say that one must cover the affected area with moist woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it is treated with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.Et autrui dit que l’on doit covrir li leu de lainne seche et de velle, et mettre oile chaut sus li leu; puis soit curez de la cure d’esguarison, et de medicine.
And some say that one must cover the affected area with dry wool and cowhide, and apply warm oil to the site; then it is treated with the treatment for healing, and medicine. And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing through the cloth, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split open the area of the broken rib, and place a .i. instrument underneath to ward off the syphilis; and then one should cut into the bone, gently pulling and then sewing up the two lips of the wound if it is large, treating it with poultices until it heals. And if a warm abscess forms, then moisten a cloth in rose oil and place it over the affected area; treat the site as needed for the abscess, and keep the patient resting on their side where the pain is, until it heals.Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can bend; and also at the spine in the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will survive or not, pay attention if their hands are soft, swollen, and lifeless, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is deadly in various conditions, and if they can move and feel pain when you stretch and press on their joints, know that the joint is safe, and the injury will heal if treated.
And if a similar thing happens at the spine in the back, and you want to know if they will survive or not, pay attention if their feet are swollen, and if the symptoms affect their hands, and they have wind and urination without wanting to; and when they are turned onto their stomach, there is involuntary urination. And when they are turned onto their back and they want to sit up, they cannot. Know that it is deadly: if you do not work on their cure.
And if this does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
And the treatment is that if he has a hot abscess, he should put on the spine rose oil or hen's egg white oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and not to sleep on the painful part until he is healed. And if any bone is exposed, it must be covered with a bandage; and the bone removed, then the two lips of the wound, if it is large, sewn together with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment and gauze, as needed; then bind it tightly, and if there is an exposed bone, put pressure on it and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if they are, then a little lessening in the head; and they grow long, and decline to the sides, and come to pain at the site, and piercing, and swelling where they are broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, then put equal pressure on that break, so that it becomes the natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.Et se ele est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si met ele a figure de croisse; et li restauration de cele brisure est que tu le tiens sus, et qu’ele ne se mueve pas. And when you have put it back in place, then apply the plaster, and then put on a wooden or leather splint, and bind the break, so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs, so that the shoulder blade is level.Et se tu n’es pas si puissans que ele ne soit igale, si covient que tu esprouves li chef a l’envers, et qu’ele ne se muevent pas tant que ele sunt igales; puis metz sus l’emplaustre et li estele, si com j’ay dit.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if a boil arises, do not touch it until the boil has subsided, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and restrain as necessary, if there is no bad occurrence; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods; one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And tie both shoulders with two bonds, and they can lift them up, and beat the patient on a seat; then let him break his arm on the anvil, so that he comes to the elbow, and put a curve of wood in it, then lift it onto a heavy object or the minister stretches it down; then put the mirror on the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one pins the patient to his hat, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers, one of whom presses what is on top of the fracture with his hands, and the other pulls from underneath to the end of the bond, and each stretches his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more force, then pull one bond under the fracture and one above it, and each minister stretches his part. And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should tie one bond lightly under the elbow and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to tie one bond lightly without effort, so that the fracture is equal on the site and on the neck; then put the mirror equal to his hands together, as it should be, and tighten it, if no abscesses come.
And if abscesses come and you cannot tighten it but he dies, then it is necessary to make a small incision on the fracture, wash it, and put a plaster on it; and tie his hands to his neck, and his feet to his hat; and also tie his neck to his hat, so that you keep him in place for 3 or 4 days, until he is healed. And if abscesses come, then do not tighten it for 7 days, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the abscesses, until they are soothed; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a cloth, and tighten on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless any part pulls it down, or if the bone is moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use a spanner, and place over the fracture a spanner larger and stronger than the others, with half a finger's width between each spanner, and let each spanner be large enough to pass over the fracture by three fingers on each side; then pull on the spanners, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less distantly.
And when you have seen the setting of the spanners and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the binding every three days, to see if itching or swelling comes to the spot, or the pus can come to the member because it is too tight. Then release it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then loosen the binding after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and let him put his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder a plain woolen cushion, and examine every hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken member moves or the binding becomes soft; then release it by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned earlier, so that the food is in the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be bound for forty days; then loosen it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the spot. And if the fracture is ugly and swollen, leave it bound for a month or two.
of the dislocation of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna' and the 'radius'. The ulna is smaller and sits underneath the elbow joint, near the little finger; the radius is larger and sits on top, near the thumb. Sometimes only the larger bone breaks, or the smaller one, but sometimes both break together.
When only the smaller bone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy; but when only the larger bone is broken, the healing is more difficult and painful than when both bones are broken together. If only the smaller bone is broken, it should be extended slightly and set evenly.
And if it is the larger bone, then it must be pulled harder; and he should extend his arm onto one pillow, and hold his wrist higher than the other hand, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their legs over themselves, and another pillow in front of them so that the patient does not struggle; then the minister should extend the patient's arm to the part below their hand, or to one side, and another minister to the other above. Then they should set the bones evenly according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none of them fit that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before, on the chest and the bone.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken singularly about it in the chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are painful abscesses, glue .i. cloth of cerot made of rosemary oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind .i. cloth over it gently, until the abscesses are eased. And then remove the cerot, and apply the ointment of the mill powder with egg yolk, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage of the fracture be a little stronger and wider than the others; and know that it must have vj. bandages in different positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in both; and bind more tightly over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes on, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the cloths which are over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rebind the member and the bandage after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should wet the member with warm water until the itching is eased; and let the member not be bound too tightly to rest. And then start the binding again, and if the bands are soft and the bones displaced, and anything else, then dislocate it.
And if one takes a bandage and the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then one must soften it a little and leave it for several days until the swelling goes down and then tighten it again.
And if none of the things we have said comes to the patient, then do not loosen it for twenty days or until he feels around, then he can move his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and take care with movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and on the knuckles there are few fractures, and only stretching occurs many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary for the patient to cross his arms and stand upright in front of him equally; then he places his hand on the extended cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones and puts them together evenly until they are well joined; and they put the plaster and the bandages, if no abscesses come, then they put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the palm around the belly of the hand, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to squeeze his broken palm; then stretch it with a long cloth, and the splint made of cured leather should be as large as the palm of the hand, and it is stretched and bound as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you must put a splint on top and another one underneath the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.Et se li brisure est entre les dois, si covient que li malaide mette sa main croisie sus la brisure, et tu estaines lou liien entre les deux os brisiez, et lie tout entor la main; et se il y a grant flux de sang, si covient qu’il le frotte, si que li sang ne fluit.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it is the nail, it should be put back in place and bound as it should be; and if there is a great flow of blood, it should be rubbed so that the blood does not flow. And if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the index or any other, it should be put back in place and bound with the finger next to it; or you can bind them all together, whatever works better, or you can put a splint on top, as in the case of the nail. Take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and dry up what comes out, as I have said.Et se li brisure vient en la jointure des deux os de la main, si covient que tu remettes li planté igal a son leu; et li lie tout entor la main, et li esteles qu’il soit droitz et igal entre les dois; ou tu mets une estele selonc la granture dou li membre, si com il covient.
of a broken thigh
[The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; its restoration is by binding one band above the fracture, and another below.] And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant applies his band to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the fracture. And if it is close to the knee, then the band should be below the knee, and the extension should be applied downward; then the assistants should put the bone back into its natural position with their hands, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, unless an abscess forms there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner. You should wrap the fracture with a hard, doubled bandage and leave any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner: You should wrap the fracture with a hard, doubled bandage and leave any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner. You should wrap the fracture with a hard, doubled bandage and leave any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner: You should wrap the fracture site with a hard, doubled bandage, leaving any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner: You should wrap the fracture site with a hard, doubled bandage, leaving any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner: You should wrap the fracture site with a hard, doubled bandage, leaving any swelling, then return to your work and treatment; the technique is performed in this manner.
And if it happens, you should loosen it and address what has happened, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned; and the wound treated as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way, with the placement of splints as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the malady is not cured with this treatment.
And you should know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions.
of the joint of the knee
You should know that there is little breaking in the joint of the knee, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or a hole, and it happens with and without wounds, and it feels good to everyone.
And the restoration is that one puts what is broken back in place with their fingers, as long as it can be; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put on a round splint, and bind it as it should be; then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; then treat each accident as appropriate, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right 'mustelz' and the other is called 'foscile'. All types of fractures occur in the leg as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is just as it is in the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Then administer extension, and make it equal, and tie the splints equally; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, then take two wooden splints that support the leg on both sides, and make them as long as from the knee to underneath; then wrap two bands around each one above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some people use a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly apply it where there is an injury; and move the leg every day to check for any hot abscess or other accident; then treat it until it is healed.
of the break in the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and also two wounds, and it happens with various injuries.
If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see the bones sticking out, have the patient lie on his back, as if he were going to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are protruding, and press down until they return to their places. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the arch of the foot, and then bind it tightly with bandages and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if one or both of the toes are broken, set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, and place under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and tighten it appropriately. And if there are one, two, or more broken, place on top of each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the end of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each incident as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
When the os of a woman's wrist is broken, make her sit with her back bent, then lean forward and support her from behind. Fill the vagina with cotton and insert a stone as big as an egg into it. Then make the woman stand up and gently lift her back, little by little, as the cotton comes out, until the stone reaches the entrance of the vagina and pulls the bone with it. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. You can also take a lamb's bladder, attach a cane to its opening, fill the bladder with air by blowing into the cane, and when it is inflated inside, the bone will return to its place. Then fill the vagina with cotton and leave it like that for a few days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist in men or women is broken, it is restored in the same way as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who have experience with them and understand my book. For the fractures show us in many ways the right path to restoration: listen therefore.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and bottle it with the penis; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three days, and it will be healed quickly.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described attest.
And if the wound heals, and there is no infection from vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart by resetting the dislocation in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses arise.
And if a hot abscess comes, let recovery wait until the next day, so that the abscess may be quieted; and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, one should gently put it back into place with slight extension.
And if extension is not achieved by hand, it can be done with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long; and the width should depend on the size of the wound. For this, a mirror is needed so that one can see how much is needed in each case of fracture: it should be round and slightly thick so as not to bend under pressure when applied to the affected area, with a point in front and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «palainche», so that the curved head of the bone should be placed under the point of the instrument; and it is bent once, as far as it will go, and made even on both sides. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then one must cut off a little from the head of the bone so that the instrument can grip it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use the head of a suitable instrument, or a knife or saw, according to your skill; then remove that which is lodged in the bone by rasping and cutting away tiny pieces.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then do as much as you can to put it in its proper place, then moisten a cloth with black, acidic wine and apply it clean if there is an abscess; and do not put any cerate or other ointment on the wound so that pus and corruption do not come to it; then bandage it up after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not pressed by the binding; and many times fools have done this, causing death or corrosion; and let the compression be gentler and softer than with other breaks.
And if the wound is large and bad, and you doubt that harm will come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put anything on top of the bandages; but wrap around, instead of the bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you put on top entirely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.Et quant li os est remes en son leu natureil, si covient qu’il soit tuit desconfortable de s’estres; et s’il a grans dolours, si doule estres par frotement oile sanante ou ungient, si com oile de lassoun, ou de laire, ou de gariou, ou de lons, ou d’autes oiles sanantes.
And when the bone is back in its natural place, it should be made comfortable and not restricted; and if there are great pains, anoint with healing oil or ointment by rubbing, such as oil of larkspur, or of laurier, or of garlic, or of onions, or of other healing oils.
And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downstream easily.
And if they persist for many days and the bow cannot be set but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these broken pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, then it should be treated according to what he says in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it, for many die from this, but leave it until it turns green; perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can, and if you cannot, leave it.
of bruises that come over the soudure
Health often comes after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the distorted limb; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care therefore if the pus is fresh: administer to him astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you prepare any of these substances or all together, and cook them in wine, vinegar, egg white, or garlic; place it on the wound in poultices, and keep it tightly bound for several days; then loosen it, and reapply another one, until the swelling goes down; or apply a piece of well-prepared plaster, for the properties of the plaster are such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned into a hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut it away, and bring out the excess material; or have it removed by a surgeon, so that it heals, and is cured.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, there are several causes for this: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive its nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in his body, and he is weak.
And the cure is that you cause the patient to eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and rest; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and moisten it often with warm water, so that the swelling subsides into the limb; and return to its natural figure.
until the limb is straightened after health
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, they should be moistened with warm water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, and roots, and honey, and similar medicines that soften: and you make an ointment with marsh-mallow silk, and confit it with tallow of ewe or olive oil, and apply the ointment on; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with colon-fennel, and similar medicines that soften.
And sometimes the dislocation is reduced by continually and repeatedly rubbing with moist hands. And motion must be encouraged in the limb every hour.
And if the tortuousness is awake and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut to the bone with a subtle and light incision; and apply poultice and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
For if one delays, the joint will swell and if one tries to reset it, it will only cause more pain.
However, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscess has drained; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each part as the healing occurs in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
of the jaws
Then it happens that the mandibles are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little displaced from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in several ways.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not tarry.Car li membres sont de vray desaloiez, et il ne puet demorer en lor leus;
And the members are truly dislocated and it cannot remain in its place; and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient and puts his finger from one of his hands into the root of the mandible dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two fingers are free, to apply pressure equally. And instruct the patient to soften their mandibles and move them in all parts.Si li mires ne puet pas remette la dislocation ades, si covient qu’il le mette a leu et qu’il le tenge en tel maniere que li membres soit en lor leus; et por ceo il doit aler a son leu, et ne deit mie demorer avecques lui.
And the priest looks at her equally, until she returns to her place.
And if the dislocation is serious, especially when both mandibles are affected together, they should be soaked in warm water and oil, until they are reset slightly; do not pull on the dislocated jaw, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with softening, then place it on moistened cloths in rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligaments.
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders should be supported between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor effort to chew, but takes soft food, until the pains are relieved, and the mandibles are bound.
and then eat what he wants easily, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well bandaged and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and perhaps stomach issues, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person it happens to dies within eight days.
of the fork
The forepaw cannot be dislocated from within the continued part of it and from the foot, and is dislocated sometimes by force, and it is felt well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it.
And the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it can, and if it is dislocated sometimes, then put it back in its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is put back when it is dislocated from its place.
of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder may be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the acromion below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it is dislocated above, and this happens rarely.
It does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the acromion, especially in those who are thin; in those who are stout, it dislocates with difficulty, and goes back in again with difficulty.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Then you must test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
And you will know of a dislocation when it is drawn down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them: and you will find a pit in the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose or move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly at the touch;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to treat when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the technique is that the minister raises the sick hand, then places his fingers under the shoulder, and forces the joint upward to its place; and the minister raises the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; this will be effective immediately.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and soothing and softening ointments should be applied, such as a decoction of aniseed and fenugreek and wild sage in water, and then the patient should be wrapped up.
Then the patient should be laid on their back, and a layer of equal wool, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder joint; then the minister should place their heel on the sto, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the sick hand;
and another minister dyes the head of the patient so that it does not move down; the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it reset in this way:
and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the shoulder, and press his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it can also be reset in another way: and is that one inserts a long stick into the ground, whose head is as wide as a pestle, and is neither too big nor too small; then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing straight; then his hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick of six feet in length and four fingers in width, which has its end bent at an angle to easily enter under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
then tie a soft cloth to the end of the stick so that the stick does not strike the patient, then place it under the shoulder blade; and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder under the arm, and the arm to the end of the stick; then extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is back in place, however it is, you should put a sphere of wool under the shoulder blade, then apply the prepared ointment made from mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and tie the string over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the arm remain like this.
And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that it has encountered, or for any other reason, then you must administer cautery to three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers to it something else; and treat it until it is healed.Et se li dislocation est devers lou haut, et les costes, si covient qu’on le tire adés, et qu’il soit confortez a li chief del espaule, et li mameles, et li costes, et li bras, et li nerf qui vens del chief; et s’il est fermeis et ne se meut, si est sanez.
And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse over time, then the patient should use the bath many times until the pain goes away and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pain, and it returns with pain; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is misaligned, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as the hot abscess comes out, for if the hot abscess comes out, then it is painful to reset it; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset all over, especially when it is at the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, and there is more pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you stretch out his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and the hands bent according to the wrist, around, above and below, and push the joint to its roots together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he bends his hand to his hand, and raises from the root of the palm the wrist which was dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and there should be two ministers extending the arm, and another two minister stretching it, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long double cloth around it.
and when he examines the joint in his hand, then he anoints it with oil to loosen the joint, then he bends the joint properly so that it comes back.
and when it is in place, then he puts on a dry plaster with egg white, and he holds it firmly, and binds the arm to the collar of the malady, and leaves it for some days, then he unbinds it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't fitting well, then re-do the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
And if he feels great pain after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press it until the pain subsides; or you put on the joint a snow of fat mutton, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this i or ii or iii times until he is healed; and if you see [that the bandage is too tight], put moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and then put it back on; thus he will return to his normal state.
dislocations of the hand
When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is軽いより than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or there is a hot abscess.
And the return is that you put the affected hand on a table, and extend your hand, and look at it and put it straight, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and stretch it until it returns.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the correct position; then place the patient's hand on a table with the palm facing upwards and downwards. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's palm facing down on the table, and the examiner should hold the patient's hand over the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that's good.
If not, then strain it with soothing plasters that ease abscesses, and leave it without re-adjusting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then let the joint remain twisted;
and it does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to constrict by cautery below the case, and by chance nothing else is worth it.
And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then constrict it and leave it for 5 days, then loosen it and let it be thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes it is the fingers of the hand which are dislocated, sometimes on the back of the palm or the palm itself.
So pull at the fingers until it goes back in, then hold the head of the finger and bend it towards the direction where it is dislocated.
And leave it for a day and a night, then put it back in line the next day; and don't lie on it as we have said, but move it and sleep on it that night, do this frequently until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated somewhere else.
from the dislocation of the head and back
When the head or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this ailment.
And the signs are that the bowels move without willingness, nor can he hold them back, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, or both legs or an arm or one leg.
And often the head moves in four ways; that which moves at the back is called "wry neck":
There is no cure if you discover that the hunchback condition originated in childhood; there is no cure or healing from this at all.
And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient doctors described great remedies for, with much talk, but there was not much benefit in them at all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in hunchback conditions that originate from the feet, there is no cure or healing.
and also those which come directly to both sides, and cannot be cured except by the one which comes properly from behind, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one even position, and have a pillow under him so he does not strain himself;
then place one brand in the head, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and are well closed, the fire brand as we have said, and the surgeon puts his palms on the spine, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a board three yards long, and lie down under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and the surgeon puts his feet on the other end of the board, and presses hard until it recovers. And if you see it turning to the hand, do it at the joint that turns.
And you should insert two fire brands at the head of the patient's arm, about a palm's width apart, and between each brand, above and below, have a space of a palm's length.
and have in each stake .1 hole, where the cord turns, and let the stakes be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each .2 stakes have .1 stake turning, over which the cords turn, and have in .2 turners .2 small stakes of a palm long, for the turner to turn;
and then tie the cord that is among the stakes to the turner towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner all along the cord, and the master puts the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with egg white, and then the bandages, and then the pillow of a tablet .3 inches long, which purples the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle cooling remedies until he is healed.
and if nothing comes of the health in the end, then one must administer softening and soothing remedies, with the pillow that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one believes it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, because of which one must not have any presumption - by chance it would bring about death.
of hip dislocations
You know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come about through dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind; and most within, and least dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee is more exposed than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over fire; and the area which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from without, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of him to whom it happens in front, are that his leg is well according to the completion; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The treatment for this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there should be no treatment; and one must not have any presumptuousness.
And for the one in which the dislocation is fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocations, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and will not need any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a very strong appliance, and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or with one tied above the knee; and another holds his hand above it in such a way that he presses his hands under his armpits, then stretch him with a rope around his waist; and someone else ties the head with a rope;
and stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
This stretching method is common for four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, you must apply treatment to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the armpit, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh, and on the part below the elbow, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the elbow, and towards the armpit;
then have another assistant hold his arms and squeeze the large part of the affected thigh, and stretch it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have said, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong woolen cord over the heels and over the knees, and let the leg of the malady be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be two arm's lengths above the ground; then order one minister to grip the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who grips the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has gout, and tighten one bandage on the affected leg properly, and another on the foot as well;
then put two torches, one on the head and another at the feet; then thrust a torch between the thighs at the patient's groin; and has moist rags placed around it so as not to blister the patient, then extends each limb towards him, and the assistant holds steady with his hand over the dislocation.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put him on the table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and place the patient on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant puts his weight on the painful joint, then presses with the other hand, and pushes it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the hip, one should not extend the affected leg downward or lift it up off the ground, but it should be positioned as though the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips. and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
and it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then bring the thighs together, apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3-4 days, then loosen the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then bind it as before and let him rest for 3 days; then loosen the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, you know it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their chest, and place their foot on your feet;
Then take their knee in your palms, and pull back between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and another minister extends their foot, as far as the knee returns to its place; and the sign is that they straighten their leg at the thigh easily.
and apply the plaster to it, and bind the leg to the thigh, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not walk until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not set, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully relaxed, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it is dislocated:
the dislocation is slight, and it should be extended slightly with one's hands when it has only been dislocated slightly.
And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright and grab the leg with one hand above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and press the foot firmly upwards;
and do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling the toe; if it returns that is good; if not then restart the operation for it will return.
and if he cannot return like that, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and drive a stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks and tie clothes around it so he does not move.
then hold the leg for him, and have another minister stretch the toe with his hand or with a cord tied around it so that he pulls it towards his head. then stretch each minister equally, and the stake should be between the patient's buttocks to hold him steady when he is stretched.
then have the patient hold the dislocated joint with his hands, and have another assistant lift the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place.
And when it is in place, then put on the plaster and bandages tightly, and hold the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the ligatures are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature becomes loose, then tighten it; then loosen it on the third day, and the patient can go about their business in four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they heal.
of the two
When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor issue.
And if the dislocation is in the neck or the foot, then you should have the patient lie flat on his back on a bed or table, completely straight, and place his foot on something that exposes the joints, then press firmly on the foot until it returns to its proper place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place a board under the sole of the foot with two wedges, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to heal it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow to anger;
and at the beginning of things apply a hot poultice to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb, so that the hot abscesses may heal;
and when the limb is reset, then apply hot poultices to soothe the abscesses and treat the wound with drying ointments as needed;
and if there is bruising, broken bones, or small bones displaced, then follow the instructions we have given in the section on simple fractures;
and beware of going the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will lead you astray according to your creator, and for the sake of your armor and your body. amen
