O you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely "surgery."
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, there remains little knowledge and understanding of it except for slight descriptions in books by the ancients which the hands have moved. And from this has come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is kept distant.
Here it seems to me that I should animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good masters of the hand are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And it is necessary for one who engages in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the veins moving and resting, and where their exits are.
And because Hypocrites says that what is known by name is much, and what is known by action is little; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, must be careful that he does not make mistakes and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he also cut the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out a part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
And I saw another knight who was healing a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant healers applied the break on top of the wound using a strong pressure, and they did not leave any poultice on the wound, and they left it like that with one end; and he commanded that it should not be touched; and it stayed like that until the leg became completely swollen, and the foot too, and it came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it he felt at ease and had no more pain.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely destroyed.
And I saw another knight who punctured an abscess that was encrusted and then inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For a ulcer, when it is pure of the black humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And because of this, dear reader, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each section of this book where there is danger and peril.
So it is necessary for you to be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Then take up your weapons in confidence, and approach your illnesses gently and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the other one of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not disregard a serious illness lest you be called a foolish fool."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal water cautery; it is the chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments, and about cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting injuries, and similar ailments; it is arranged from the head to the feet, and concerns the forms of instruments.
So, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy discussion and subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed on it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I prefer brevity.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether .ij. complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
In hot and dry complexions, some people said that cautery is very helpful; others said the opposite, that cautery is not effective for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say the contrary claim that cautery helps hot and dry diseases that originate in people's bodies. Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, one should not undertake this without first having experienced it themselves, and understanding through long practice the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is a greater good than burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member if properly used.
Burning medicines spread from member to another in repelling fashion, and bring about the illness of a painful cure in the member; and by chance they kill the patient.
Fire because of its heat and because of the goodness of its substance does not hurt if there is no excess.
And I have discovered this through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been placed under the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, describing how it heals illnesses in bodies, as the philosopher explains through demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for pressing pains that are sudden and urgent and cannot wait until a more convenient time.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so, but it is not true as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexions, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness and virtue and authority.
And it is possible that the disease will sometimes return according to the complexion of the malady and its location and nature; and the excesses are assembled within it through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to remove the excesses and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is evident; but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are milder than those of iron, and they said this because of the nature of gold and its high quality; and they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have tested and found to be the case in some men.
Nevertheless, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is done in the fire, and so there is enough hindrance.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer, tu le sais bien a la calor que il est chaus por la noirceur del, et s’il n’est pas trop chaus il reste chaud longuement; si si li eschaude trop, il se rompt et n’a point d’empechement.
And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter on the head and neck, so that the path may be easier to find.
on olive oil cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types made for different causes: one for a condition called "soda", which is caused by various humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears; also for many ailments caused by coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a purifying medicine, cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then let the patient sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his lap; afterwards, place the root of your palm between his eyes, where his nose bridges his two eyes, and heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare," with which this is done.
And place it on the marked spot, and move your hand up and down while rotating it; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if there is a small bone fragment; and if you don't see one, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed. Then take a little salt, put it in a piece of cloth, and place it on the spot; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
And the ancients say that when an open wound persists for longer, it purges more, and for this reason, it helps to use leeches.
And some say that one should leave the cautery on long enough to burn a part of the bone, and then have the burned part of the bone cut out and cured.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on so long as to burn away a piece of bone as large as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then the wound must be left open for a long time, and afterwards it is cured and seared.
And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a fear of fainting; and I would rather leave it untouched, for the shoulder is weakened by continued dislocations, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more saving and mild for me, and therefore I practice this method.
of the old pain in the head
When chronic pain comes throughout the head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the sick, which are called 'cochie', as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they are given the cautery that we have mentioned before, but it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize it with that cautery a little bit as we have said above.
After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said before, and do .i. cautery in the place where one puts leeches; there is .i. place for which one uses cupping glasses; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from the others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and it is .i. form:
The horns which are on the head of the sick person, if they are in their nature of coldness and dryness, and of bone-holding; therefore, one should make the cauteries that are placed on them subtle to the string of the ox, and subtle to the others that are mentioned above. When in the head there is sudden pain and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said about diseases, and all this does not help; then you should do cauteries according to two ways, that is to say of medicine and of fire.
The cautery of medicine with garlic is that you take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and wrap it in a piece of cloth, then make an incision where the pain is located so that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and move away from the clove of garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days; then apply a poultice of cotton soaked in butter until healing occurs.
After the wound is healed, if you see that it is necessary, do cauteries with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery of fire is done in the following way. Heat the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the shape of a claw with a small curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and remove your hand so that the artery does not blaze, which is forced out, and abundant blood flows.
Afterwards, put cotton in wine vinegar, and apply it to the area for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery that is called "cultellare", which has a pointed tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this hemorrhoid, which is not old.
of hemorrhoids
When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery that is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and it reaches to the bone; and be careful of the mandible that mutes when one chews, and let the mute and spasms come to the patient, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is covered, or covering has great fear and likewise for those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-healing; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of the artery when it is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of pain in the ears from cold
When pain in the ear persists from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, called 'point', which has this shape:
After you have punctured all around the ear that is sick, or both if the pain is in both, and then move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the place; and have .x. points around each ear; after cure the area until it is healed.Et se tu vois que la dolor ne se mute pas, poins tout le costé de l’oreille qui est contrainct de froit, et t’esloigne vers la racine; et si li dolors ne se mute, poins entor les  .ij. oreilles tant qu’il soit saine, car il adoncque deffaut de nature.
of mouth torture
[There is no need for cautery in those ulcers which are due to flux, as we have said in the sections on diseases; nor should cautery be applied to those that arise from dryness and inflammation of nerves.]
When you treat this kind of mouth torture that arises from flux of humors and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with . three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear just beneath the horn of the head, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the appearance of the knife is as we have described before, but it should be a little more flexible, and the knife itself should be a little thicker; afterwards, treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the spot called 'vassels' is located, as we mentioned earlier; and the last cautery is on the stomach's mouth. And let it be treated as we said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large and purifying pills for the brain; then, shave the head of the patient all over, and apply a liniment of mustard to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have described.
If he is healed like this, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see the need, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery called 'olivare', as I mentioned earlier.
of coldness of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and what we have previously mentioned; after shaving the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after healing it until it is healed, and use the cautery that is called "olive" which we have mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Those with epilepsy should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; and first it is necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering, taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's men take hold of his head, and they make .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the illness is in an infant, make 1 fine cautery according to this method
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with gentle cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist due to the illness, then give them something to drink that will purify the brain according to what is said before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient, make a well-fitting linen tortilla in the shape of a circle and place it inside the head; cross the linen and hold it tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment and smear old goat's butter on it; gently heat it over fire until the patient can bear its warmth; remove the linen from inside the head and let it cool down; do this for the patient once a week with good care until he recovers.
Or, if you wish to cauterize the eye, make several small incisions with the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in butter and gelatine fat on top.
of the eyes When eye pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a cleansing drink for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After he commands him to look up, and cauterizes the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the dislocation is in both eyes, or one if it is in only one; and stop all veins and arteries beneath the brain, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as well as you can.
And I will teach you the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauteries; and sometimes cautery or haters are done beneath the two bones at the back.
of the body from weeping
When the tears in the eyes are old and habitual, and are upon the veins, or beneath the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or haters beneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all around.
where tears flow from inside them
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head, and cauterize him with the middle olive cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful not to hit the artery. And this is the form of the cautery that is called  "clavilis":
When the skin around the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare." And this is its form:
And if you see two warts as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that points towards the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted to the opposite direction, pointing towards the eye, and one performs cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then the patient should put their hand in warm water; next, draw on the paper a shape like the leaf of the myrtle, and have the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and wormwood over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
After that, cauterize the shape you drew bit by bit many times until the wound is burnt there; and the sign of the healing of the work is that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put wet cotton in lard as long as the scald is healed; then cure with ointment until it is cured.
And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the paper becomes soft again, then begin the cautery in that same place again, as you did before; and if the hair is broken off, then cauterize it so that the paper rises to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cautery of medicine that burns is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of the myrtle; then take equal parts of French soap and vitriol, and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and place it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, then on both; and put wet cotton in egg white underneath the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and place their finger over the medicine, and press it a little and move it each time the patient feels biting from the medicine, because they feel the biting as well as the fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift the area with a bandage, and check if you see the papery skin lifted as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine had not worked, until your work is even and your eyes focused; then place wet cotton in butter on the burn until it cools, then treat the area with a salve called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and the papery skin becomes soft after, and the hair grows in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the area which is softened by the papery skin properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle twig:
And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.Take a cautery-iron that is medium-sized and flat on one side; heat it until it turns white-hot and place it against the fistula, holding it there until it feels as though it is burning the bone.
Instruct the patient to tilt their head towards you; have an assistant hold the patient's head steady in such a way that it does not move or turn away from you. Then wet cotton with egg white or purslane juice and apply it to the eye. Heat the cautery-iron so that it is white-hot, and hold it against the eye in the shape of a tent, or if you prefer, in the shape of a pen-tip, pointed from one end to the other. But whatever shape you use, the cautery should be applied gently so as not to harm the patient's eye.
Afterwards, press on the fistula if it is open to drain it and then dry it off. If it is closed, then open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery-iron gently and hold your hand on the iron at the edge of the eye, taking care not to cause harm; place the cautery-iron in the fat around the eye and corrupt it there.
If you reach the bone with the cautery at the start, that is good. If not, repeat the cautery again, and a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days; after which apply moist cotton on butter, and treat the wound with the drying ointment until it heals; and if forty days pass and it has not healed, apply an corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king according to what happens in his kingdom.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients said. Identify the fistula, and make an incision; after which place in the slit a thin piece of cotton with which is the formula: and they make the amount of a bean's worth of plaster; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, and do not move the patient so that the melting plaster does not run into his eye; and one must apply moist cotton to the patient's eye, made from walnut juice or from a mixture: the plaster melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good. If not, one must administer a poultice to the nostril, and bring the fistula back into the nose according to what is appropriate in its own place.
of cracks in the lips Often, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the site with cerotet until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it creates swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you should treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, and if it does not heal: you must then reveal the site and remove the rotten bone according to what you find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your desire; then fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let them gag for an hour and release their phlegm.
And in this way, the tooth that was loose is now firm, the gums softened and restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
from dental pain
When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is required: cauterization with butter, and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter: take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the moistened cotton and butter cool off, heat up the iron again until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cautery using fire is such that you grab a cane of iron or bronze, and it is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, whose shape will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times, because the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter quickly during this cautery, and then rinse; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to cold dampness and is stubborn to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that afterwards the shape comes as mentioned, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from one side of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, then use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for 3 days. Then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must be purged first with solutive medicines; after that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware not to go any further up into the throat, but just scorch the heart slightly. After that, make another cautery at the joint between the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle', as described before; then treat the area as we have said until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described before.
And if you see it, make a cautery at the tip with the cautery called 'poins', of which the form is given above in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach up to thirty or more. After that, treat the area as described before, and use three cauteries according to this form:
And for this reason are cauteries lighter, because you make them .iiij. times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, apply the cautery to his back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has .ij. nerves of the duck's web where there is a lump:
and cauterize the head until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery will come out with four cauteries; and for this reason there is a cautery made with a cautery which has three points, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three points:
And sometimes it is adjusted above that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put the broiled porrells on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and the limb should not be moved for a long time until he is completely healed.
And if it is dislocated above, little can be done, so therefore make the cautery on the thickness of the clavi-bone cautery, or many cauteries in points. For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long, dry root of aristolochia, as thick and long as your finger; moisten it with oil, heat it in the fire, and cauterize .i. cautery between the sternum and collarbone, and .ii. small cauteries a little lower down on the part under the beard; and .ii. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and .i. cautery in the armpit, and .i. another over the stomach, and .i. between the .ii. shoulders, and .ii. at the .ii. sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the .ii. shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but do it gently as when incense-burning.
And some ancients said that one should use a cautery of hot iron like  .i. razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and it leaps away from the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this procedure there is now fear for the patient's life, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you are treating the disease of the moon as we have said in the sections on treatment, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterizing which are all good.
Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, cutting according to the length of the moon, in accordance with the figure of the cautery of the liver which we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, but let the patient lie on his back carefully.
And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has two tips, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and press the cautery where the disease comes towards the left, or the armpit, and let the elevation according to which you lift the armpit be according to the armpit, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
After that, put the two tips in flame until the armpit is pierced from the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you want, cauterize with all the cautery with three tips. After the treatment, when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is as good as any of the other treatments mentioned earlier.
of dropsy
Cautery is not effective for dropsy except in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the anus; and the cautery should be close to the base of the heart.
Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the key we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
of foot swelling When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, otherwise you will push out the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the base of the toenail; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; afterwards cure the others that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When there is an issue with digestion due to coldness and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and in great distress, then do as follows: make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was said before about the cautery of the stomach; and make four small cauteries around the abdomen with a slender rod for each cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder blade, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the larger one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and filled with thick cold and moist corrupted humor, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is completely underneath the armpit, little by little in a triangular shape; and two cauteries under the abdomen.
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swollen, then the face must be cauterized with a large cautery on the stomach, as already stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with a cautery all along the clavicle; and let the cautery remain for a long time. After that, cure the area until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul."
When you scrape the  "thelul," heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the scraped  "thelul"; keep your hand there so that the cautery comes to the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of  "thelul," cauterize each one as we have described. After that, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
of an uncured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, there comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is swollen and suppurating with corrupt moisture, you should first test it with a thin probe to determine its depth. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the probe entered; repeat the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of suppuration. Be careful not to burn any nerves or large vessels. If the fistula reaches the bladder and intestines, be cautious of these areas and do not apply heat to fleshy places, as this can cause harm; instead, think that it is not sensitive. Then cure the area until it is healed, and if the opening is sealed and the matter discharged for a long time, know that the fistula is completely healed. But if the matter is not discharged, understand that the fistula has pierced through to the bone at its base, and the bone is corrupted; and thus, as we shall say in its proper place.
of kidney disease When frosty pain comes to the kidneys, and with great windiness, and it does not take the form of a woman, then you must cauterize him on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery over the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be curved as described before.
of the brain When the brain is cold and moist, and unable to conceive, and the fluids are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the head, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; and let the cauteries be curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this, the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and if the place of the displacement is found hollow, you should cauterize the malady on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and cure it until it is healed.Et si li boistes est trovez plis a l’un costé que a l’autre, covient que tu le cure de la partie qui est plus haute, et si le cure tant qu’il soit sanz dolor; et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent.
And if the socket is found more on one side than the other, you should cure it from the part that is higher, and cure it until there is no pain; and if there is great pain, then you must cure it by little bridge, until the pains subside.Et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent. When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured of that which we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After that, let him cauterize; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, among which one is such that you cauterize on the hip socket three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and there should be between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all of the hip, and all of the thickness of the heart is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, let him be cauterized where he feels the pain with two cauteries there, and one cautery above the ankle of the little toe on the left side a little; and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two of the toes or near them, let him be cauterized where he feels the pain with three or four cauteries, which are called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care with all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it on so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. Afterwards he died from a belly-ache.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery on one and then the other according to this method. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip joint, of which here is the manner: make one iron tool that has at its head as much width as a thumb nail, or a little less, and it should be smooth between the teeth, and from one tooth to another there should be the distance of a thumb nail; and they should have teeth on both sides, and it should have a good handle. And this is how it should look:
And it should be heated until it is bright red and smoking, and then applied to the hip joint of the affected side, and turned to the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be applied once for each cautery, and then left for three days. And then use an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and although we see few who use it, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can endure it should employ wherever they need it.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact, or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold matter spreading, none of these indications warrant cautery except in the case that arises from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar, to apply an ointment over the back where the pain is, in three parallel lines, and in each line .v. cauteries, or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called «point», and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the medium-sized cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine in the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery of celandine according to this form.
So that the cautery purples every part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij. or .iij. lines long, and let the points be close to each other. After curing the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in a swollen area which is on a nerve.
of joint pain
When joint pain is caused by moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when it comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be healed with medicine, then it is cured through cauterization in this way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
And if there is a need for you to cauterize on the face of the foot, do it with the entire "point" cautery. And if pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize every knee with 3 or 4 cauteries in each part, all with olive-colored cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand against it for longer than the thickness of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then do 2 lines around the wrist; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then do cauteries on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize every part, and practice good care for the patient and take medicines. For if you practice good care for him and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
of the root of the tongue
When a hernia occurs in the groin and the testicles descend into the scrotum, it is newly formed. So when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces will exit his abdomen; then have him sit on his back between your hands and command him to hold his breath until the hernia is repaired, and then pull it back into your hands. Sign with your finger underneath the hernia over the bone of the groin, and throughout a sign that resembles half a circle on top of the body; then heat up the cautery which has this shape:
until it is white and dripping with pus. Then pull the hernia back into place; and the minister should hold his hand on him so that it doesn't return; and treat the groin well for the patient, and put a cushion underneath him and a servant on each thigh, and another one on his feet who holds his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep holding it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone. Be careful that the hernia doesn't pop out when you're using the cautery so that you don't burn him; and through this the patient won't die or suffer any other harm.
And you should know that when you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for large people also according to their size; after 3 days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the burns are healed; then cure it with other ointments until it's healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up. And the hair should be cut short for a long time so that the hernia doesn't pop out when he stands up and walks around.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for .xl. more days; and he should have good rest, doing little work and avoiding excessive eating and drinking, and too much loud talking; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment of cutting in his head. of abdominal hernia
When hernias occur in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then make .j. cautery with the cauterized iron according to its quantity, and burn it in the third part of the heart; after the cure, according to what we have said. Some of the ancients say that one must cautarize it with the three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first sign the point of entry and draw a line over the breadth above the hernia, and another from the side, and hold your hand in the middle of the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and easier.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then cauterization with the cautery called "point" is needed, and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torque and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of that one, for such custom is that it must change in the limb nearest to which it is, so you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of mixing
The boils are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, and so are diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not discharge or remain, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and 1 behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery comes to the bone, and as long as the skin pops out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cauterize on the mole according to what it is in front.
And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly losing strength, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and another smaller one, two cauteries on the shoulders; two cauteries on the ears, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is placed on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help it will bring, and it will benefit more; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the site with flour made from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
swelling
When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; the cautery should be a little hot in the depth of the wound. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, or where the nerve that moves the limb emerges; thus, the swelling is removed. But no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the emergence of nerves that move the body.
of poplars
When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the wound until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then treat it with an ointment made of equal parts wheat flour and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and almond blood. Mix everything together and apply it, covering it with a cloth and exposing it to air until it heals.
the treatment of ulcers by cautery
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen more than once; and a more straightforward thing is to cauterize around it, using the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot heal
When someone has a disease that is called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal, either due to the excess fluid it produces, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old), and they have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, piercing in; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it is formed:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it leaving in such a way that the course of the pustule is relieved. After the cure, until it is completely healed.
the fire cure through iron
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", which is simply a corrosion or rot of the limb, for it rots the limbs just like fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery tools, both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you reach all the corruption and none remains. Then leave it for three days, and apply ointments to the cauterized areas to soothe the burns and remove any remaining corrosion or rot. After three days, if new healthy flesh appears, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize where the corruption still remains. This type of disease can sometimes be treated with medicine instead of fire cautery; however, cauterization with fire is generally more effective. I have already described the treatment for this in the section on medicine: apply it as needed.
of sores that come on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet, due to dampness, a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises, and it is a thick, misshapen thing that blisters the foot. The cautery for this disease is according to two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as hot as a feather, as though it were a pen, made of good iron to the measure that it can press against the nail on all sides, and that it has thin edges; then place it completely hot on the nail and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of crushed mallows with salt and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then heal the place with ointment, gently, until it is cured.
And if they are converted on the body, and many times they occur in the hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a brass or iron rod, or a pen, and place it on the nail and the callus, that is, warts; then place the rod so that it wraps around, and pour a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly and press your hand as you turn it so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail and can find the hot water a deep path to the root. Then let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Thus do one after another until you extract all those on the body, then heal them with ointments that promote healing.
trembling cure
When someone is shaking from coldness in their nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], one should make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebrae; and one cauterization on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus will it stop the shaking, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear as boils or stinking pustules, which come from putrid humours. One should cauterize the top of each pustule at the first sign of their appearance: with a thin stick made from myrtle wood, the tip having been heated in the fire, or with a long piece of aristolochia root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery. Sometimes they are also cauterized at the beginning, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further afterwards; the superfluous matter from which they came is disrupted, and they are healed; but this should be done after bloodletting.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great bloodletting from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small as the wound and the location where the artery is running, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is staunched.
And if the blood spurts out when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful that you do not harm the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be staunched well by itself when the artery is large, except by one of four methods that we have described: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines put on which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and compressed skillfully.
Whoever administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on it, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard until it feels tight on the wound; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and tight; and make inquiries beforehand about what cauteries and medicines are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cautery by fire or burning medicine, and the oedemas and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from head to foot, and I will go through this chapter in the same way so that one may more easily find what they are looking for.
And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater care is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. For people come to cures in many ways: some are so worn down by their illness that they would quickly die of the strain if they were cured, and because of the greatness of their illness; one must fear for such people. And among these there are some who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is relentless. You should not give in to such people, but hold your honor dearer than your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know for certain, and from which you can expect gain and reward; and use prognostication and indication in curing illnesses where safety lies. This will help you attain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease comes very often to children when they are born, and when the baby's head is squeezed too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all cases I have witnessed, death has resulted; therefore, it seems best to me not to treat it in this manner.
I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture accumulated under the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone. If the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split the head open widely in the middle, making an incision as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out. See the figure of the spatumile:
If the pocket of moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening up in each part, and water squirts out when you press it with your hand from the inside, and it does not close back up again, then you must split open the head in four places in this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture with force. After that, close up the fissures with bandages and powders, pour wine and oil on it, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as he can take with a little moisture, until the limb is healed and well.
And another way of incision is to examine where the aperture of the abscess is located, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and make the incision according to what you can do; but be careful not to cut an artery, for then there will flow a stream of blood, and the patient will die from bleeding and evacuating moisture.
from gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area around the eyes with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then squeeze the patient's neck all around with a 1-inch wide bandage; then look where the vein bleeds, and the spots are after the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the spots inside with a sharp spatulum, then cut both with a 2-part spatula so that the vein bleeds up to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
And if you see it, insert the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also about 2 inches across.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow upward continuously.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of the space of three fingers, and then cut in and slash up to the bone; and the amount of blood let out should be about six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if nothing of the syphilis remains above the bone, and the heat of the abscess does not come, then extract the wound and ligature it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of emetics
When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes, and heat in the temples, and old madness, and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine but none of it helps him, then we should open the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair on his temples, and feels the artery in the temple, which opens clearly by its pulsation, and is little relaxed towards some people who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, the patient stretches his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkles the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatulum, of which there is the form:
then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with tweezers, and carefully separate the fibers underneath in each part; and if the artery is slender, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
And draw the blood out for a quarter of an hour to three hours; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and let the blood flow gently; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is helpful in drying out moisture; for this reason, it is even more useful for moisture. Or it is fitting for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, one should apply dry medicines that cause a blister to form, and also use bandages, until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as much as you work at it, then hasten to cover it with a cautery, or employ vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is scorched; and if you do not have that at hand, then put vinegar on the wound so that the blood congeals, and moisten the wound with cold water so that the blood ceases, and bind it as it should be; and what is best and gentlest for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutter must be quite thick in order to retain its heat for longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well. And the space between the two knives should be a finger wide, and when you have cut into both sides and placed the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and closed the vein in two places; and the two heads should be kept apart because they are not joined by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the shape of the cautery:
tears
When the tears flow from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and there is trembling as if from fear; and when the eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelids have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched and burnt by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And they called it "cure contused," and you do to the patient who has this disease, that you cut the hair on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is as two fingers everywhere in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two are at two sides above the eyes, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are at the sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the extension of the two jaws, and each wound is the width of three fingers across.
From the incision that is by the temple all the way to the second incision; and scorch all the skin between the two incisions up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then pull out this spathumile.
Then pour into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellare," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and it is shaped like this: And cut the incision towards the chest and the armpit, and the lower incision towards the bone, and tie it so that it comes to the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eye until the incision is continuous up to that which opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other defiant; and then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the blood taken; then put into each incision a tent of old cotton, and place wet fabrics soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming there; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of warm water, and then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healed.
from the eyes
When someone has a sudden catarrh, and you see the eyes are red and small, and the vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs do not come from anywhere but from many veins, and the medicine that cures it is here.
And you should command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerve endings in the temples that control movement in the face. When the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack the two lips of the slit with old cotton and linen bandages. Then apply dampened sheets soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses. Once it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with healing poultices that promote the growth of new flesh.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice out of it; administer it to wounds to promote the growth of new flesh everywhere.
on the treatment of ear infections:
All that falls into the ears are one of four things: grains, animals, rocks, or similar objects such as iron; seeds such as peas, beans, and lentils; and fluids such as water, garlic, and similar substances.
When there is an object in the ear that does not adhere to the ear or grow within it, hold the ear towards the sun. If you can see the object, apply some violet oil or oil of nard, and then remove it with a pair of fine tweezers. Make the patient sneeze by administering a snuff, close their nostrils when they sneeze, and place pieces of linen or wool around the ear. This method often works, and if it does not, then removal should be performed with delicate tweezers, as follows:
If it comes out with the tweezers, all the better; if not, then perform extraction with a small, thin hook made of fine wire; and if it still does not come out, make an iron hook and insert its tip firmly into the ear canal, then pack the space around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook. Then pull it out forcefully, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; but if it does not come out like this, take some bird glue and attach to it a tool made for this purpose, and place some cotton wool around it. Then press the glue onto the object, whether it is a stone or something else, and pull it out. And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then you must split the ear so that pus and heat may come out, and there will be spasms; and the manner of splitting is to first make the patient lie down on his back, and draw blood from the head according to its strength, then hold the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs, so that the cut is shaped like a crescent moon and reaches the object. Then remove it with your fingers, and suck on it vigourously with your mouth until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an enema; and if it cannot exit, then administer a suppository with a thin rod according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In acute ear infections, the patient should use a warm compress and pack the ear with soft cotton. They should lie on their side with the affected ear facing up. If the fluid drains out due to gravity, that is good. If not, they should take small stones according to the size of their finger, heat them slightly over fire, and place one end in the ear and the other end in the fire; and they should hold the stone in place with their finger until the fluid drains out completely, as we have said for the stone.
In the removal of a foreign object, if it is a small body such as a louse or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, administer an enema with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is not effective, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight. If there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers; if there are none, take a cane, and where the shadow falls is where the worm will be.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end of the cane into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the condition; then suck firmly on the cane; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, stop up around the cane with cotton as I said before for stones; and if they do not come out as we have described, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations. Distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, where the shadow falls is where the worm will be, as you can see:
And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a well-crafted brass instrument for this purpose. Take a razor and wrap cotton around the end; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever else you want from your medicines, into the cane, and let the cane be in the ear. Then fill the razor with cotton all around, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed over fire so that it is not too cold when distilled into the ear, for the medicine would not be as effective then.
of the treatment of ears
No child is born without an opening in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults through the plugging of a wound or of pus within the ear, and sometimes these plugs come out of the ear, so one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a little plug, and one can see it clearly.
Therefore, when it comes out of the ear and one cannot see it, it is a matter of concern in various situations, and in such cases, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then treat it according to its shape:
And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is of pus or from the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a thin, lightweight razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the growth which causes the patient great pain when they hear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a plug in the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is closed, or take a plug and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, you should remove the plug and replace it with another moistened with an ointment made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then clean the wound until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which come from the distilling of fluids.
of paper charcoal
This ointment comes from papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
And if there is no hair in it, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cautery after the incision is done; and many times they return, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come in papers with things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is a small thing to know; then open it with tweezers, and peel it from each part gently, and then grab it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not trouble the patient; and if the crack is large, make a stitch in it, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it at once and heal it.
And if the stone is descending within the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is removed by incision, that is not harmful; and when the stone is crushed, then wash out the ear with salted water, and treat the passage where the pus flows until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat which is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it is very painful for their eyes; and they get the discharge in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes. And so they lie on their faces at night, and sleep with their eyelids underneath, which become swollen and covered by the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, it comes out between them.
And the method of the treatment is that the patient puts his head on the operator's lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers inside the circle. Then cut through the moist skin with a spatula, making an incision no larger than the wound made for vein opening; and in various cases, the exirnach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove then with your hands a piece of cloth between them to the rear, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press on the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye, lest you injure it.
And if the hernia appears at the beginning of the fissure, press the fissure gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, and moisten with water and cloth, and place on the site, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who sweat and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat the hernia until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the site, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et se li est ains disloiez, si covient il que tu le ramonies et que li remmes a son leu; car li chiés de l’ajutoire ne puet demorer en son leu si com nos avons dit.
And if it is dislocated, then you must reset it and return it to its place; for the head of the shoulder cannot remain in its place as we have said.of the papers
When hairs grow from paper, different from nature, and are ingrown, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes. The cure follows four methods: through cautery with fire, or with a medicine water according to what is described before the chapter on cautery; it can also be done through incision and suturing or with caustic, according to what I will describe.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are growing out of place, and thread  a single thread through the eyelid, going over the edge of the paper, and draw the thread all the way to the top of the eyelid. Then, in the part below the eyelid, below the misaligned hairs, cut into the skin with a spatulum, starting from the large tear duct up to the small one. Remove the thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and fabric beneath the eyelid, then draw a figure-eight shape on top of the eyelid, like a myrtle leaf, and adjust the shape according to how much you want to lift the divided eyelid.
And if it is necessary to lift a large amount of the eyelid, according to how soft the paper has become, then cut into the skin with the spatulum along the two lines you marked, starting from the large tear duct up to the small one. Let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs, about the thickness of a hair root, then insert the hook in one of the corners of the wound and lift it all up; then, let the other incision be on the opposite side, and assemble the two edges with a single thread of fine wool through an needle, and tie off the bleeding and trim the excess thread above the two eyebrows using any sticky substance you like; if not, ignore it. Then, leave the sutures and threads in place for three to four days; then remove the sutures and treat the wound with dry, astringent substances. The eyelid will recover quickly without sutures (as the ancients say), and this method is less frightening.
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is just like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told you, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
then copy what is above, with small letters evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you don't have the strength to hold the tweezers and it is not even, then take a needle with which you will sew, and the first thread through the large vein, and the second thread through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told you, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and soothing ointments.
And sometimes the paper fibers are reversed; so you must use what we have said about the incision, but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the paper and place it inside according to what I have said; then make two warts by art, and two thin threads as long as the width of the spathamile; then cut two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over what is above the wart, and pull the two warts out from their roots; and let them be thus for some days, and the skin that was pulled will die and harden and fall off as it becomes dry.
If it is slow in coming off, then treat the wart until it is healed; and when the wound has closed and the paper has lifted, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two warts that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the tools are such that you pierce with a thin needle and thread into the skin, and tie the two heads together subtly, and let the length of the thread be about a palm; then prepare in the case a second thin silk thread, and tie the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head in your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the treatment is revealed, for it is a subtle and small treatment, then pierce the needle all the way into the skin along with the natural hair until you draw it up through the paper, and then draw out the hair to just inside the case, and tie in the case that hair, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs are drawn taut against the paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the wound underneath to the full extent that you have ordered, until the wound comes out from the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you shall treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated, and then release it.
from the eye's pustule
When this disease called "alacrity" or the pustule comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you split the swelling, and loosen the eyelids, and put in it tents of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and one must not use in its cure anything that dries and restricts. For if you do, the disease will become worse than before; but one should use emollient things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and a poultice of linseed, and the cure of these.
And the goal of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not fuse according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
of the meat that comes in the eye
This disease which is under the true name of "axacrati", and are natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and tears and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, and make it pass through from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the eye; then the flesh is pulled up above to the very needle, and the skin is cut open by about half a spathum wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and cut 2 slits on each side within the paper; and the edges of the 2 slits on the sides of the incision which you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the number "1" in Greek; then remove that flesh, according to the amount that its sides are cut under, from what follows the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure it as we have said with softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or a wound or cautery, then you must make a plain slit underneath the hairs of the scrotum, and according to what is stated above; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
suddenly from the scrotum
When this suddenness occurs in many men in such a way that the scrotum above is suddenly cut off from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore push the point of a razor underneath the scrotum and lift it upwards; and press it with tweezers, until you grasp what is open in the spurge plant, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the spurge plant too sharply cutting the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this union, lightly, so that the scrotum returns according to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and they sometimes produce a sore in the eye, and moisten it with soft wool; then place a tent of linen between the scrotum and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the poultice and the soothing things until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nervous but looks like congealed white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched with tweezers, cannot be removed; both kinds originate at the outer corner of the eye, grow little by little, and eventually cover the entire field of vision, along with the light and movement of the eye.
And the technique of the incision is that the patient should place their head towards you, then open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it out; then take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, double over the tip of the needle a little, and insert it into the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it out, then cut away all along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the eyelash, up to the root of the eyebrow, with the scissors very carefully and gently, leaving the natural skin of the eyelid so that the incision does not affect the tear ducts; sometimes only the edge of the nail is stretched out and tied with a thread, as we have said; then cut it away all along the eyelid where the eyelash grows up to the root of the eyebrow.
And be careful that the scissors do not touch and tear the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and place a collar of lint around it, and leave it until the next day; then clean the eye as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle in, and the hooks cannot enter it, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and they are born like I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatule gently, poke little by little according to this form:
And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the pus is pushing out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper, and seal the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a hook and cut away a part and not all, so that no body of tears comes to it; then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
of the flesh that grows over the pupil
In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows over the pupil, covering it and pressing against the eyelids, and it turns inward, resembling a rosebud. The treatment is for the patient to press his forehead against something solid, then open his eyes wide, and hold them that way while the doctor cuts away the flesh with small knives suitable for the task, working carefully; he then cuts away the first layer of flesh, continuing to cut until all the excess tissue is removed, taking care not to hurt the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made using a spatula, as described in the section on incisions for fingernails and other small areas, where we also mentioned how to remove the subcutaneous tissue, as demonstrated in this chapter.
Once the incision is complete and all the excess flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made from sealing wax or similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton pad over the eye, keeping it in place with egg white, so that the hot abscess is secured; if there is nothing left behind and the pain persists, you are dealing with a hot abscess, so leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your treatment when the eye is healed, and continue in this manner for any further occurrences.
However, you should always take care to treat weak eyes with natural remedies and accidents with iron tools; never insert your hand into an eye during treatment if you can help it, until you see that the patient is suffering from that particular treatment.
of the eyes
They are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they disturb vision and weaken the eye all day. So therefore, in the first place, you should examine the eye to see if there is anything else wrong with it apart from the red veins; then heat the eye gently according to your judgement, and the eyelids too, very gently, according to this method: instruct the patient to lower his head, then gently press the veins all around the eyelid, very gently, according to your judgement.
And two more in the .i. lid, very gently, according to this method:
Then you press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, as much as you can, until you have removed the veins from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave anything behind from the red veins. And when you have finished, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the red veins.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances for the pain of them, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is secured, then begin again according to the method described earlier until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
Look closely at 'arissati' fistula: when you heal it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a gap in the eye where you cut into the abscess, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then it returns to all its instruments so that this is the form; and it is called a  'sharp chief', and should be made to grind down from there to the tip, and be pointed like a file as it is in the current form:
And put it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
if the wound is closed and healing occurs within 40 days, and no new abscess forms, and no bad accident happens, you may know that it has healed; but if not, there is nothing else to do except open the fistula again at the site of the nose according to this form: then uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when uncovered, pierce it with a needle according to this form, and let the iron rod have three angles, and the shank be tapered to a point as you see here.
then put it on the bone below the eye socket and move your hand away a little, then pierce it again with the needle until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through his nose, for the blood within flows out if he holds his hand over his nose; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the matter dries up and hardens, go to the nose. This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance to the eye or a decrease in vision, then you should ligate the patient; then bandage him, then place leeches on him without piercing the skin to draw out the blood, then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla to the eye, and then bandage it with strips of linen according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten the bandage from above with a hard strip, and repeat the use of leeches without piercing the skin; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bandaged day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should tighten it; then remove the ligature after a day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the ointment and the bandages and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
from the rupture of a woven fabric
When disruptions occur in a woven fabric, it opens and looks like a grain of resin, and is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce an needle into the root of the part below up to the part above; then pierce another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the armpit; and tie one end of the double thread around the fabric, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a soft linen to the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes through the bottom of the eye, and cut away the white moist membrane and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then extract it until he is healed.
from the bowels of the eye
This disease called "alkunati" is nothing but a bowel that has gathered in the eye, resembling water, but it is not; and the manner of its appearance when working is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then hold his head with your hands from both sides and move him so that you see the bowel coming above your eyes; then let it settle there and be removed from the light source, and the patient sees things as he used to. If it does not go under, know that it is water, and if the distention of the bowel is not apparent as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatulum and pierce through the conjunctiva and the cornea in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea until the bowel comes out; and when it is issued, distill warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, into the eye, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
of the eye's waters
We have the appearance of the ailments in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not harm his healthy eye, and tie it very tightly; then place the paper over the eye with your left hand if the eye is on the left, or your right hand if the eye is on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eye is on the left, or your left hand if the eye is on the right; then place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the eyelid in the part where the tear duct is located, and then carefully insert the instrument called "almagda" into the eyelid, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the eyelid, and feel when "almagda" reaches the empty space; and the depth of the path of "almagda" should reach the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the coronal part of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the horn-like cornea, and then insert the instrument all the way to where the ailment is, and express it from one path to another. If the ailment drains now, the patient will see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, if the ailment returns through the second path, insert the instrument and when it is firmly stuck and not rising, gently withdraw "almagda" by turning your hand slightly; then put in a little seal gem oil and remove the instrument from the eye. Then apply to the affected eye a poultice of comfrey with plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, place on it ground comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
And if  "almagda" cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the form:
And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then pour in alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free of all movements, and eat light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the operation or after the incision now, but you should ease this, so that the water rises gently.
And if a hot abscess comes, remove the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, then remove the sight and put on his face a bandage to cover one eye, and let him be in that dark room again. And then go out of the house a little bit at a time, and turn around in his case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in his land they pierce with alum, and they suck out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen anyone in our land doing this, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si en cest cas vees que li membres soit engourdis, tant qu’il ne se mueent point, si doit on le fere aler adés sus quelque membre ou autrui; mais s’il se mueit quelque chose, si convient il que tu le tiennes par force et le faisses aler au repos; et s’il est en tel cas que li membres soit entortuit ou qu’il se tordent l’un sur l’autrui, si doit on les tordre ains que les os se remettent a lor leu, et s’il sont tortus en telle maniere que les os ne puent venir a lor leu, si convient il que tu rompis li membres ou la jointure.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almucad, for those who do not know them will see it; and they are properly made of copper:
And let the heads be of this same subtlety, and the hindmost have three pointed ends.
of the ear near the nose
Sometimes they grow on the ears as diverse warts, some of which look like scorpions with many feet; and others have a dark colored wart, and some have a light colored wart. So for those warts that are light colored and not dark, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun; open his nose, and drop the fluid on the wart, and pull it out; then, as much as you can withstand with a sharp needle from one side, until you know that the wart is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it with a very subtle instrument lightly so that nothing is left behind; and if without swelling, cut the abscess as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then apply cold water or vinegar or wine.
If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, you know it is healthy; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, you know that there is corruption in the bone above, so do not use instruments for cutting; instead, tie a piece of linen thread, fairly thick, around the nose, and tie it between each nostril, with a space of one or two fingers; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth to his greatest ability, and draw it through the odorant until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out through the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently one after the other while holding your breath. Do this until you know that the thread has corroded the corruption, then remove the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything left of the corruption; then put a plug in the nose made of plaster for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry it out, use it. This is the instrument used to purge the head through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
It should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, with a spout; and if you want, make a closed one, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and there should be a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the heart over the navel
Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the navel and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore one should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it has become large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an ulcerated abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the site with dry and constrictive substances.
when the navel is cut and sewn
Know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does little good except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the .ij. lips with one suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are separated on either side, then you should cut all parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the .ij. lips with a single suture, tighten them, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and place upon the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In the mouth there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling peas, small and large; therefore you must open the lips and slice through each pustule with a knife, and then grip them with tweezers and scrape away at each one; next apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use garlic and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
of gum tissue
Many times a tumor grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then apply crushed vitriol or other drying and constricting powders to the area; if the tumor returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery. These are the forms of tumors to be cut.
of disorders.
Sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and appear as ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth themselves become black, green, or yellow, as corruption spreads to the gums, and they emit a foul odor; you should have the patient lean forward so that his head is between your hands and his teeth are visible to you, then pick at the growths or discoloration until nothing remains; likewise with black, green, or yellow stains, clean them off completely; if they come off at first attempt, all the better; if not, repeat the process the next day or the day after, until everything is removed; know that teeth require different types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the condition presents, so that the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the teeth themselves; these various forms and others should be prepared and ready.
When treating a toothache, you should not rush, but take as much time as possible, for there is no excuse for causing pain during the procedure. Then, when the patient is forced to draw breath, you must be certain which tooth hurts. Often pain in the jaw leads one to believe it is a sound tooth that hurts, and so one draws air through the good tooth; yet the pain does not go away because of this as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these patients; and when you are quite certain which tooth hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then spit out strongly in order to push up the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or delicate pincers a little at a time until it is well loosened; then grip the pincers firmly; and have the patient's jaw between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Then draw the tooth out straight without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the hole with lint; and hold it tightly with the pincers so that it does not break when you are pulling it; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining, and also be careful not to do as ignorant surgeons do, who often in their haste and arrogance break the tooth, and do not heed what we have told you; but sometimes bring about great illness through the hole made by pulling out the tooth, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the socket; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shape of the instruments with which you pluck out teeth first should have long points and broad handles so that they do not break when you pull on the tooth. The shapes are:
And they should be made of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and have teeth to hold the gums.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains in place while pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days until the gums soften. Then use forceps called "algefri", which resemble a surgeon's jaws; and they should be made like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you should uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to say a spatula, of which this is the shape:
And it should be strong and wide so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the shapes come below:
And one should use this instrument with two edges, of which this is the shape:
and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the shape:
And let this instrument be strong enough that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break in the cart or other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and aids with gestures, by which this is the form: And let them be thick and strong enough to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it with all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, then take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of tempered iron:
And pluck it gently several times a day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with one part of this file as shown in the form:
and is also like the lime with which needles are made; and in lime the tooth little by little in the hand, so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth it at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pierces the tongue, it should be filed down so that it is even and does not pierce the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the front teeth loosen, through blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on anything he eats without it slipping out, and you have treated them with binding medicines to no avail; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and bend it double between two healthy teeth; then put the hook in between the two sick teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the bleeding point on the other side. Then start binding again from where you began, and pull your hand gently and firmly so that it does not move. The wire should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot slip out. Then take hold of the hook with some pliers and bring the two ends together, and tie them between the healthy teeth, so that it does not pierce the tongue; and let it remain thus as tightly as it can, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, bind it with another wire. It will remain and serve this way for all time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of how to straighten two healthy teeth and two sick teeth, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, for sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow's bone, and put it in the place where there is a defect, and bind it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
cut the vein of the tongue
There are two types of this vein: one that comes from under the tongue, either from birth or accidentally due to a wound; and the other type comes from the throat, which is how it should be. Open the mouth of the patient, lower their head, and lift the tongue. Then cut the nervous vein widely so that the tongue is dislocated from its socket. If there is a hardened area due to an old wound, cut it open and then cut the vein widely. Be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery beneath. When you are done, apply rose water or cold water to the area, and then place a linen tent under the tongue. Apply a poultice of garlic and vinegar to the patient's tongue every night so that the wound does not heal and stick together. If bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the site; if the bleeding stops, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
If you see the vein is dark or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is a ulcer. If it is declining to become a blister and there is moisture, cut it with a spatulum, freeing it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your action, apply ground vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment, pulling everything out; then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat the wound further until it heals.
of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes there appear in the throat warts which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, so as not to cause bleeding; but leave it until it bursts, or it will burst by itself. And if it is white in appearance and the root is thin, have an instrument ready to cover it, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and is calmed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your lap, and he should open his mouth and the assistant should hold his hands between his own, and press the tongue underneath with the whole instrument, which is the shape; and it can be made of silver or thin bronze like a knife:
Then you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, grab it with the tweezers and pull it up into the almond, and draw any threads of the warts with it; then cover the instrument, which is shaped like a needle, so that it appears sharp; and yet the ends are curved, one towards the other, and they are very pointed, and it is made of iron or bronze:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cover it with tongs, shaped like a needle:
Let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to this same method; then after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle with water, or with the peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses other than the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for one more day or two. And the abscesses had grown so much that they had pushed out two bumps from the openings of the nose. I quickly inserted a probe into one opening, then pulled it outward, extracting a large amount of pus; then I made an incision in the other nostril and cleared her airway and pressed her tongue; afterward, I inserted the probe into the abscesses and cut away at them, and only a little blood came out; thus, I unblocked her airway, and she began to drink water and then wine. I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time, and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so, I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it from within the throat. Thus, it stopped growing; and I departed from these parts, and she recovered on her own afterward.
of the grape
When the iris descends to the pupil and it is swollen and enlarged, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is swollen underneath and round, it is called an "iris". When it is cured as we have said in the section on curing, and the cure does not help, and you see that the underlying inflammation has subsided and it has become thin; and if it is round and not long; and if it is blood-red or a pale color or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its appearance and size, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the iris and move it around beneath the surface, using one of the two instruments I described for the incision of the two almonds. You must not cope more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it causes pain and difficulty in speaking. After the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears coping, then you should use a cauterization on his tongue without fear. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient places his head in your lap, then presses his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; then apply live coals so that they are not too hot nor too cold; and with this implement, which has the shape I have described, scrape off the surface of the eye.
And on the head there is a hair or place where medicine is applied, like the edge of a spoon, and the instrument is placed on all the medicine over the iris; and the patient should lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat and into the lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it against the iris for about half an hour, until you see it become numb and the stinging of the medicine subside; then take some cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the eye so that the cotton is pressed against the iris; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and afterwards rinse the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and the instrument inside should be bent according to this shape: And it can be of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapour rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; afterwards, repeat this often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen; and do not do this after the hot abscess has subsided. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and place an egg-white inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the egg-white will not allow the vapour to harm the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
Many times there is a bone or fish spine, or some object stuck in the throat; therefore, you should try to remove whatever you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the spot, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument made of soft lead according to this shape:
And the instrument should be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and the tip should be lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it may cause harm, and do not push the os down; and move the patient's head so that they can swallow the instrument, in order for them to dislodge the object; then, they can either swallow the instrument, or you can pull it out along with the object.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes the blood is stopped, as I have said in the discussion, by medical treatment; and if this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient at the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook or with thin tweezers suitable for this. And if this doesn't work, take a sheep's horn and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the horn, and do this frequently. And if the patient is suffering from acute fever all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood sees the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke out the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described in the section on smoking out the throat. Do this many times, for it will certainly work. The method of smoking out is to place burning charcoal in a container with a perforated lid, and insert the end of the instrument through the hole; then you smoke out the patient, who puts the end of the horn into his mouth and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will stop now, and if it does not, then smoke him out again many times. Let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and dry foods, and drink no water; and then he will certainly pass it.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats hemorrhoids, when one can see it, resembles bent tongs in order to be able to enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so that what it seizes, it cannot let go; and here is its form:
the abscess-draining instruments
The appearances of abscesses are many, according to what the recollection hereafter comes to us in this book, and they differ in piercing and in size; and there are two ways in which this happens, one way being in its appearance itself, and the other in where it is located on the body. For an abscess on the head is different from one on the fundament, and a suppurating abscess of fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs at a joint, and each has its own treatment.
And for an abscess one must not pierce it when the boil is soft according to its maturity; but there are some which one must pierce as soon as they have become crusty and are not cured according to their maturity, such as those that occur at a joint. For when an abscess occurs at a joint, and one lets it be until it is crusty all around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will become corrupted, by which there is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and one delays the piercing until it has matured, it will harm the principal limb. Or if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it when it is crusty; and one must not pierce an abscess when it is crusty without digestion being complete, except for that which occurs near the fundament, so that pus does not push through to the inside and form a fistula; and it will take a long time to heal.
It is necessary for you to know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fullness, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the discharge and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary for you to make the piercing at the highest point of the abscess, and where there is movement; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
For abscesses that are in bending places, pierce according to the member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the piercing until it is confirmed in full digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, it will lengthen the body with poison from it, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it will harden. And for some abscesses, one should make small holes according to the width of the body, and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where one should split the heart, and cover; when it has become as soft as a drape, and is dead, one should do as one does with blisters: and some are split in three angles, and some are covered like the leaf of a bay tree, as with abscesses of the veins; and some have a round incision, and others have incisions and similar covers.
Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced straight; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn up a great boil, and you pierce it, one should not draw out all the boil in that hour, but some part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again from the top; do this many times until the boil has come out completely; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man. For the pus sometimes jumps with the mengeluarkan of the boil that it kills the patient, and you do not realize it. Therefore use great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then dress it with tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then put a tent in each one so that they come up against one another; and if you have split the skin of the abscess and drawn it out all around, then fill it with old cotton or the shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and a cloth, and moisten it several times over the bleeding area. And if the bleeding persists, apply pressure and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should place moist tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said; then drain the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
And now you must understand universally about the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and you will find this chapter [on the subject].
of sores
Or know that there are small abscesses that come from the head, and they are like those of hives, as in the udder of a cow, and there are many types. There are fatty ones with a lot of moisture, and others that are hard and stone-like, without any doubt if the artery does not do otherwise. The work of this type is to try every instrument called an "entromissoire", from which the shape comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it is cut from above. And when the moisture is drained, it is scoured without leaving anything behind, as it will return if something is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and repeat this for those who stay overnight. Then restart with the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you are sure that there is no more pus left overnight; then treat the wound with suitable ointment, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains a fatty lump, cut it according to its shape, from above; and squeeze out the pus, and scour all over, and put all your care into drawing out the membrane where it lies; and if the artery causes contrary, then do as I have told you after. And do the same with the
And the incision on the stone-like and moist abscess is lighter, because there is less blood. And if some of these abscesses are in the head or where there is no moisture, then they are cut open .i. abscess that I copied on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, and it could not be broken; and if someone had cut into it, it would have caused as much bleeding as a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept at the most dependent place all day, so that the pus can drain; and they are treated as they should be.
of scrofula
Many times abscesses come to the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are many, and are joined together. And each scrofula is properly within its sheath, as with the vein and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofulae. There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and do not respond to treatment. So in one that you see has a good disposition to be touched, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side, and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should open it on top, and cut away each part, and the two lips of the wound are curved inwards, as necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and draw out a little at a time, being careful not to cut into any nerve or vein, nor is the spatumile [a surgical instrument] needed, nor forceps, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
If you open a vein or an artery and it will not let you work, put crushed vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding into the wound and compress it; and leave it until the abscess is reduced and the wound softened and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, completing it; then examine with your finger if any small scrofulous nodes remain, cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the node, do not cut that node at its root but ligature it with a strong double thread and let it fall off without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton saturated in Egyptian ointment and then cure it.
And if you cut out the whole node, it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, so that there remains no superfluity due to the size of the node; then ligature its root and draw it out, as we have said. For nodes that hold superfluous matter, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce thus for those previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply tenting with ointment and similar things so that what remains is corrupted by corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment with healing charcoal.
[of scrofula]
The ancients wrote and spoke of throat surgery; but I have never seen anyone in our land perform it, and this is the record of their words.
For those with squinance, it is necessary to cut into the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not hesitate to do this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the lung, one must cover the epiglottis to prevent asphyxiation due to strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge et qu’il soit necessaire de le fendre, il covient que li fendure soit a l’epiglote, ou li maladie ne pueda aver finne; car la est lor mort.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four circles, a small split across the two circles, or according to the size of the split in the hyoid bone, not in the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to cut the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within it.
And if the teacher is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the entire length, then cut the cartilage until he reaches the hyoid bone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the hyoid bone as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe of the hyoid bone which jumps out through the hole that is broken, and by the fault of the voice.
and leave the wound open a little bit.
And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut all the way to the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albuchasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of air has ceased. Therefore, grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus he is guarded from death;
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passed in 3 or 4 days And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maid take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe;
And I was called to cure him, and I found him as dead.
I exposed the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and judged that it had not bled well or been treated properly before, as the blood was still flowing from the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
and the lady had no more trouble with her voice, and returned to her usual state;
so I say that when cutting the epiglottis, have no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of yolk, and it occurs much in women;
and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural type has no cause.
And accidents happen in two ways, one of which resembles a tumor that comes from the brain, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear in it, and one should not operate with fire except on those who are small, and test and examine throughout the entire orifice; if you find it as solid as a tumor, and it cannot be pushed at all, then cut it, just as one cuts tumors, and slice through to the bone, if there is none. and examine thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
And now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
I say that an issue is when there is a fever and heat, until the ebullition has passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat cease.
With the cold there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, some are grey, some moist, and they have many colors as I have said in the division.
You should, when you come to the treatment of the cold, first test and examine it with all the instruments that are called "intramural", according to what its form will lead to in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of examining abscesses on the head is that you press the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core, then it will be according to the size of the abscess;
then remove the instrument and pay attention to what is left behind.
If pus runs clear, whatever color it may be, treat it as I have described for other abscesses:
and if no pus comes out after the instrument is inserted, know that it is a cyst, so treat it in this way: make an incision in the shape of a cross and extract the fluid with tweezers, then lightly scorch each side of the wound and remove the coat where it lies to ensure it heals clean.
and if you cannot extract it cleanly, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he stays nothing, he returns to us many times;
and if he stays a little, and the wound does not trouble him too much, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and bind it up, and apply soothing remedies to the abscess, and treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus to form.
and if the bleeding vessels are contrary or elsewhere, and you are in a hurry, use powdered vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the blood stops flowing; then return to treating what has been delayed.
Here are the forms of the cutting instruments, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types among them, called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for excising abscesses.
They are like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are better than those made of black iron for excising abscesses.
They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the abscess.
The shapes of the knives are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are some with two curves in three ways.
and if they have three crooks, and are also in three ways; and if they have two crooks, and only one crook, and are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these knives are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, which we use to scrape the bones without cutting the vein or nerve.
And with these introducers, there are some that are wrapped in cloth so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses.
and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
and one must not use it other than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes a small instrument like slices of fists, according to this shape, with which one stanches blood:
and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals by cutting off the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they are tied according to this great shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain unsightly and swollen, and if anyone wishes to treat them, then they must be bound according to the form of this line b. up to .g.: then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then close the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it heals;
and if the breast sags and becomes soft due to its size as it does in women, then they make two incisions above, through two similar slits; so that one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then he scorches the skin between the two lips, and removes the fat, and he applies what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
and if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, then you should fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it absorbs the remnants and fat, then treat it until it heals.
of abscesses of the testicles
These abscesses which come underneath the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.: And when all the pus within the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply a cautery as we have described before.
from bleeding of the artery
When an artery is cut, and the skin above it is sewn shut, it often results in abscesses. And so too does the vein swell and form an abscess.
And if one recognizes it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a constriction. And when it is from the vein, there is a defiant swelling that appears.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, and in that which is inflammation of an artery underneath the skin of the neck;
Therefore one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, and in that which is inflammation of an artery underneath the skin of the neck; then cut into the vein with a sharp knife, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed;
then insert a needle under it and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .2 inches, according to how I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
then point to the location between the two bonds of an intercessory instrument so that the pus within flows out and the abscess is relieved;
then administer the treatment that changes color, until the thread turns white; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to an opening in the vein, then you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then thread the needle under the spot you are holding in your hand, and pierce it through, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, either on one of its two sides with a thread;
and if you are worried that the thread will come undone, then tie another needle to the same thread underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
then scrape the abscess so that the excess comes out, then scrape away the excess from the skin and leave what is tied;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
then place upon it .i. moist cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tenting and ointments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the nerves
Also, as an abscess comes in the artery and vein, so does an abscess come to the nerves when they are bruised or from too much exertion, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and hips, and throughout all joints where there are connections, and it is .i. grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain;
and when it is held firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely in the body, but below the heart;
and is mute from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or below or above, and for those who are in joints, it is not appropriate to cover with iron: otherwise there might be contraction;
and those who are on the head or forehead, make the skin the spatumi. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root;
and if it is large, then he should stop the bleeding at once, and scrape off any scabs, then the bone, and sew up the wound, and dress it until it is healed.
large boils hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to oats, and it has fine roots and large scabs; there are both small and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two of them on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, with fine roots, and they bled when cut.
I copied them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a subtle root.
If the cut is wide, and the cautery tools are in your presence, because there often come great flowings of blood when cutting, and if the blood flows away from you, then hasten to cauterize it.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take a well-made piece of thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then release it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until he copes the joint, and seek out through it without work; and if the roots are large, if there is fear of coping from the belly as well, but you can certainly cope half.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cover the thistle which is of foul color and poor sense, and of milky appearance.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or cut, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other routings, or from blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and through the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens from various outlets. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it will pop back out, and sometimes it will be dry, and it will grow larger at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a minor issue, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to wind, then there is a swelling at the touch, and the procedure is to observe whether the appearance is from arterial blood, or venous blood, or wind. If you must let it be. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be completely straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to sit up quickly between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed all around the spleen, then cut off half of the abscess from the top all the way to the large nail;
then cut off half of the abscess that extends over the bandage, and push your finger in, and probe the intestine; if you find it stuck to the bandage, loosen it and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
and if you find a boil, they take it at the root, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery makes it go in the opposite direction, or the vein, then walk around well, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and then thread the two needles through what you have pierced in a cross shape;
then pull the abscess in four directions on the needles, and if you see any pus, remove the needles and let it drain until it can no longer; or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then treat the abscess as we have said;
or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then treat the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture you find, then treat the area as it should be, and close up the wound.
from cancer
We have already discussed the types of cancer, how to treat them with medication, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment. Now, let's talk about cancer that appears on the skin, which requires great caution during treatment. According to the ancients, when cancer is found in places where it can be easily scraped off, such as on breasts, thighs, or similar areas, it should be completely removed during its early stages. However, once it becomes large and established, you shouldn't attempt to treat it, as I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed from it before me.
And when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should first purge the patient with black bile; then let them bleed if there is an evident repletion; then clean the area where the cancer is located; cut off all hair, skin, and bone from the affected area without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and squeeze out any remaining blood with your hand or a tool; if the bleeding from the artery or vein opposes your incision, cauterize it until the blood vessels are sealed. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
of dropsy We have already discussed the various types of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatments using medicine and iron. Only two types should be treated with iron, tympany and hydrops, because these are deadly conditions. So, when treating dropsy with medicines, if the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as diarrhoea and similar issues, then one must not use iron as there is a risk of harm. But if the patient is strong and only suffers from dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then one should proceed with the following treatment: Examine the patient closely and feel their abdomen with your hands. Then, using the spathum ilepinum, a tool with a sharp point, press on the abdomen to force the fluid towards the lower part of the bladder. The tool should be about 1/4 inch thick, but not so sharp that it pierces the intestine or causes bleeding.
Then, determine if the dropsy is located towards the intestines. If so, you should make an incision about 1/4 inch deep and 2 inches long on the right side of the abdomen, just below the rib cage. If the dropsy is due to a liver ailment, make the incision on the left side. If it is due to a spleen issue, make the incision on the right side. Ensure that the patient does not lie directly on the incision so that the fluid does not flow into the weaker area.
perforate all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand over the entire spatumile between the skin and the syphi as when peeling a nail or an onion; then pierce the syphi until the spatumile emerges at the desired location, which is where the pus is located; then pull out the instrument and insert this instrument from which the shape is derived: it resembles a thin silver rod, made of brass or light bronze, with a small hole in its lower part; on one side there are three holes, two on another, and one on each end; the head is shaped like a feather, resembling the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting feathers.
at the tip of which is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the pus, it will immediately drain onto the instrument; empty half or a third of it, because if you drain more than necessary in one hour, the patient may die from the loss of his spirit, or he may faint, or come close to death.
but empty it according to the amount of its strength, and according to what the disposition of the strength of the patient indicates, and his pulses; then pull out the instrument and retain the pus, which is now retained by the plug at the hole in the syphi, as I have described, that you should pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small quantity of pus.
do this on any day, and avoid bathing as long as the wound remains open but use a little water. And if you doubt the wound, leave a lot of water, then use the cure of the grave or hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and drink lots of fluids; and use the medicine to dry up the wound until it heals, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before.
on the swelling of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening on the penis, or the opening is small and not in its proper place. In this case, one should immediately pierce it with a very fine spear, then insert a fine plug of lead into the opening, and tie it and leave it there for three to four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug; but sometimes it is not necessary because the urine that comes out opens it up. Those with a small opening will be cured by the lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are unfortunate because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and the foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the slit falls in the middle, as it should be; and take care to avoid bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop it with a cauterization of wax, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times these warts come on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should pick them with a needle, and cut and clean them all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with fine ointment until it is healed. And if the wart is malignant, black and foul-smelling, then you should apply cautery to it. When you have cut it, and if the wart is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the wart that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the outside. Because if you cure them both together, the skin of the penis will not be secure and could be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in the penis and testicles; so cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and poppies, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two uses together, namely, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you should tie a lead weight to the penis and let the patient urinate; and when the skin is peeled back at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument until the foreskin is detached and the head of the penis is freed all around.
And if it is a serious matter to talk about this, then you should scrape it with a spatulum or some sharp instrument at the head of the penis and the foreskin; then bandage tightly between two, and place a thin damp linen cloth soaked in cold water over it so that it does not peel back again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best and most gentle job for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not tell of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who did circumcision around one inch, and to many forces, and to all a new foreskin; then the wound healed because there were two membranes, and occasionally one above copes and remains below.
Then they recover covering, and the pain is double, and in the cleansing which is of the glans is not assured the tip of the member; and in the cleansing of the nail occasionally the iron slips, and they ruin the work, and many times they are born so that they do not need cleansing, and I have seen this.
Of the cleansing which is done to many forces, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in all directions; but the thread should be well-tied around the skin; and the method of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you let him pull it out in any way he can; then hold the rod between your hands straight up and down, and keep the child's fingers or the instruments out of sight; then suck on the rod and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the rod is inside; then clean the rod thoroughly of any discharge, tie the site with a double thread, then tie it again lower down with another thread; hold the rod between your index finger and thumb, and pull it up quickly and smoothly, then release the urethra suddenly and pull the rod;
then hold the rod between your hands straight up and down, and keep the child's fingers or the instruments out of sight; then suck on the rod and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the rod is inside; then clean the rod thoroughly of any discharge, tie the site with a double thread, then tie it again lower down with another thread; hold the rod between your index finger and thumb, and pull it up quickly and smoothly, then release the urethra suddenly and pull the rod; then let the blood flow a little at a time, for it is the pus; and apply powder on top of the powder a thin layer of egg white cooked in rosewater, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it again until it heals.
The shape of the fingers at the cleansing should be like this: both knuckles should be tense and pointed, and the fingers as thick as the palm equally:
the error of purification is when the cut inside bleeds; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail so that the wound forms an abscess; and scrape it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tongs and then scrape it.
And if it lasts for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is relieved and the scab is light; then scrape as much as you can move, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore treat the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we discussed in the treatise on powders, and if it scrapes beyond measure and goes upward, it will not harm; therefore treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stone, or congealed blood, or bowels, or dead fetus, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and his feet placed on his back, and he should press his belly from above the back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is forced upwards to expel the stone, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: it should be made of thin silver, like the stalk of a bird; and the tube should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the end.
And the method of releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread, and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; then squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the end, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter, and have the patient sit on a chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil or olive oil and warm water;
then put the syringe into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the foreskin back towards the glans; then fill the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain come to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the person guiding where it goes is wrong; then tie the thread all around the penis tightly little by little, and the urine will follow the thread, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
then start again with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When blistering or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do all the apparatus that is called "clepsydra", and this is how to make it.
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The medicine for this should be such that it stops the flow well without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when necessary.
And when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out with the catheter. Then push the catheter firmly back in, and the moisture will enter the bladder and the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is made like this:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below there are two strings attached. Then take a sheep's bladder and put the medicine in it with which you want to enema the bladder. Then tie the medicine between the two strings that are formed from a thin double thread, and heat one pouch of the medicine over the fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then pull your hand gently on the bladder so that all the medicine flows in smoothly, until the patient feels that the medicine has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a .i. circle, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong cord through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside whatever you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it into the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already discussed in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one must operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens most often to children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it appears yellow, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks up; and most of these have the foundations; and the healing is easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines. For sometimes it blocks the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and make him stand up and move around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then have him sit between your hands, and his hands are under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the urethra, then hurry to cut on the stone. And if it does not drop out with just touching, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and draw it out to where you want to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to lift his testicles up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which has a curved shape:
And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and both fingers should be on the anus, and the incision should be across the penis so that it is wide by force, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Sometimes the pressure of the fingers on the anus makes it jump without effort; and you will find that there is a kind of stone which has angles and edges: it is hard to extract; and there is another kind which is beneath, similar to a gland, round, and from which the discharge is easy.
For one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must pull it with tweezers which are also like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert under the .i. instrument a very thin tube curved at the tip; and if you cannot capture it thus, then widen the opening a little, and if the skin tears, pull it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut it off, then pull the rest out if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: they die, or the urine comes out through the opening where the foreskin cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out, or break it up with tweezers, until you extract it in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound and bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth steeped in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then wrap the patient's neck again with a bandage and do not loosen it for three days.
And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
And if hot abscesses and scorched wounds, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained due to this condition, which occurs when the urethra is blocked by urine: insert a needle into the wound and draw out the blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst;
then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in every way you know how, until he is healed; and it is necessary that every hour you treat him, you tie the two thighs together, and apply the medicine to the affected area.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the cure of what I have said before, that you should cut it many times, is sufficient for this cutting. I have already tried this myself.
Take a piece of iron according to this form and let it be filed into three angles:
then take a wire and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will come at once, and press your hand upon what is left of the stone which is inside the penis. As soon as it is broken, it will fly out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that deflates them, then tie a string under the stone and another above it; then cut the penis in between the two strings where the stone is, and pull it out, and untie the string, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stones
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will submit to examination, especially if she is chaste.
The third reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and great fear accompanies it.
And if you find this necessary, you should bring in a skilled midwife and with her, a wise woman well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of medicine; and command them to do what you instruct concerning the examination of the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her finger into her vagina and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it beneath her finger, and I recommend that she pushes her finger into her vagina with the wound, and presses her left hand firmly on her bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
Then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone so as to widen the wound enough for the stone to come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with veins. You should know their appearances in order to identify them.
And if the urine is dark, put ground vitriol into it and hold it for an hour until the urine is clear; then return to your task, until the stone comes out, and have assistants whom I have mentioned to you in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work;
and if the blood flows and it is from an artery that is cut, then put powder on the spot and constrict with bandages and strings, and do not loosen this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out at all, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place has healed, return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshy hernia
Rupture of the waters is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is under the heart of the eggs, and is called "phlegm", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so that one believes it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the egg between the white phlegm that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the generation of this humor is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is a declining yellow, or red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, it is a red abscess, i.e., a small one like an egg, and it does not open the testicle, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the testicle itself, then it is a red abscess with part of an egg, and so one believes that it is another kind of egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white testicle, then he feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test it on all the surfaces of the testicles, for which the shape is described above. According to this, then, what comes after the introduction, judge what is within.
According to this, then, what comes after the introduction, judge what is within. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and a lot of cloth is placed underneath him;
then he lies on his left side and instructs the minister to lie on his right, extending the penis towards one of the two sides of the scrotum;
Then take the spatule of lead, and cut the skin of the testicles from top to bottom until you reach the scrotum, and make the incision straight while cutting the skin of the testicles up to the white skin, and cut it off carefully according to your ability.
Then pierce the scrotum with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers in, and raise the scrotum up; and do not touch the skin of the testicles but only the scrotum; cut it all away carefully by pieces just as you did before, for if you do not cut it away properly, the water will return.
And if the testicle has fallen out during your work, then put it back into its place when you have finished with the scrotum; then sew together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a single stitch, and then dress the wound as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the escape of blood; then cut off the testicle at its suspension, and draw it out, and dress it as we have said.
And if pus is collected in two parts together, know that they are two abscesses; then lance the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash the blood away and put soft linen moistened in rose oil into the wound.
and put another piece of soft linen moistened in wine and oil on top, and place two cushions on it, and tie it all around with bandages following this shape:
Then take two pieces of cloth, and fill them with cotton according to this shape, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the pieces press on the bottom up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and let the other two corners press on the two elbows, and let all the fastening be in the buckle of the breeches;
and sometimes this abscess of fire cautery is in the place of an iron brand, and it is such that you press a thin dagger-shaped cautery, and lance the skin of the abscesses, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is revealed;
if one takes the cautery according to this form, and pierces that sinus deeply, and burns it with this delicate hot cautery
And the scrotum in every way that you can, as far as you can reach; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this work is safer; and move watching for blood loss, and swelling from surgery.
and if nothing makes you uncomfortable, or a hot abscess or blood loss or anything else, then treat what makes you uncomfortable according to what has been said earlier.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform incision, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the pus is drained.
Let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its base all the way to the bottom, and place the incision in the longest part of the body; and let the holes be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
Then put cotton on the spot, and bind it up, and let the rest of the pus run out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
And if the white film does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must push a feather or instrument used to treat dropsy patients, of which the shape is described earlier, into the wound; open the wound a little, and know that the pus will come back, and collect again after six months or so, and when it collects as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the testicles
Know that in the section of this chapter there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to me to leave it.
And I will tell you about its work and the similarities to abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the groin; and it is by many cases.
That is to know about an excess of bitterness and ague, which are spread in the groin, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess.
and sometimes an abscess is grey, fearsome and stony, and has a fawning color; and at times it comes from a burst artery or a swollen vein.
When it is from a burst artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are affected by swelling of the vein are known by their disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and one can well make the incision on this appearance, and on the other marks; and then you should cut the membrane of the yolk, and the white will rise to the top, and the yolk will come out easily from all parts of the egg.
If the eggs are already hard-boiled with these colors, then you should simply cut the egg and remove the yolk.
and if it is in the air in the face, or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that membrane and scrape it smooth.
And if the growth is in the rear location, then you must scrape all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then treat the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering like a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he defecates;
and the treatment of this disease is also very dangerous as mentioned above,
and yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
The patient must sit on an elevated chair, then you tie the suspenders of the testicles firmly with your fingers and pull the scrotum which is close to the penis, and grab the master testicle, and stretch it out firmly;
then cut deeply and widely through the vessels with a sharp knife, until they are exposed,
and then peel away from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
then I insert a needle where it hurts. I tie a doubled thread to the first place where the pain is, and then I tie it to the other end; then I cut through the skin carefully, following the length of the body, and I drain the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as in the others, except for any blood vessels that nourish one of the testicles;
because there is no harm in it, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one should draw out the testicles along with all the vessels; if the vessels do not lose their moisture through the incision, and dry up so that they cannot be helped.
from the rot of the sinus The cause of this hernia is through the incision that comes to the sinus, or the extension above the belly in the part of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that hernia to one of the groins;
and this hernia is in the sinus, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernias come from many causes: from a blow, or from lifting, or from coughing, or from a heavy load being lifted, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is sciatica, are that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and does not come on suddenly. and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because sciatica presses on the intestines.
And the signs of sciatica are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in different places under the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestines and the body to release the sciatica.
And sometimes the nerves go with the intestines, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments with iron, one must avoid fear.
And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to grab his intestines with his hand inside the wound and pull them out if he can; then press on his neck between your hands and lift his legs.
Then pull the skin taut from the bottom up, and cut all the way around the scrotum; then put hooks into the edges of the wound according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out;
then scrape off the scurf which is under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white scurf is uncovered all around;
then put your index finger into what follows the scrotum, between the white scurf which is under the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf;
and press what is behind the testicle, and between the second scurf; and then move your right hand into the scrotum, and hold the white scurf upwards in your left hand, and lift up the testicle to all of the scurf towards the groin; and instruct the assistant to raise the arm, and loosen what is pressed behind the elbow;
and examine with your fingers if there is any hard, dry skin or wrapped intestine, and if you find anything, push it back into the belly below;
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back of the cyst, which is behind the scrotum skin; after the testicles, then grip the shoulder, which will appear from the threads, until there are four threads; Then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the cyst, which we said was under the scrotum skin, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the head with threads, and tie it tightly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there; and place the ligature according to the first long ligature of two parts, and after these two ligatures leave the syrup that is under the heart of the testicles for a moment;
and then the other according to the roundness that the testicle carries; then cut into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, so that the blood flows, and the scrotum, as we have said before;
then administer soft woolen cloth soaked in oil, and place it over the wounds, and then administer the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flow.
For this happens many times, and leaves the wound open until it drains through it; and if it is slow to drain, then it should be lanced with hot water, and what we have said should be applied until it drains.
Then clean the wound with another cleaning, until it is completely healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to use fire to perform the cure.
And the ancients said that it is done like the remedy which joins the intestines, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above gently from below.
Then cut open the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who is affected, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and the place opens up; but no intestines should come out with the stool, and if any do, it is a small amount, and they should be repaired every hour.
and yet if he remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer increases in size as the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the ulcer which is in the intestines, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes soft and swollen and open;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut the area of the rupture, according to its size, by about four fingers' width;
then extract the cyst which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible cyst;
and press down into the bottom of the belly, then tie off the two places where the cyst is visible on the thread's head, and tie one and then the other;
then pull out the thread's head, and do not cover the cyst or stretch it with anything, as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal warts;
then treat it like a wound. And when you tie off the threads, if it causes pain and cleans the wound, let it be cleaned until it is healed.
The syphilis is constrained, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cautery is mucous in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men due to the testicles within becoming softened, and it is milky white in appearance. When one wishes to treat this condition, they should make the patient lie on his back, and then cut the soft skin on top of the tunica vaginalis; next, bring the two edges of the wound together and stitch them shut with 3 or 4 stitches; then lance between the stitches and dress the wound as one would any other, until it is healed.
of chastity
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; it is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that the owner knows how to respond when asked about it, and also knows how to treat it; the second reason is because we often have need of castrating certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts. So I say that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. When we do it by attraction, we sit the animal in hot water until the testicles are softened and dangling; then grab them with your hand until they are drawn up and you no longer feel them. For castration by cutting: you must tie the animal down, and squeeze the skin of the testicles in your left hand; then cut off the scrotum, and press on each testicle one time as you have cut it away; when you have cut them well, leave some of the thin membrane that is over the vessels; this type of castration is better than that done by attraction, because with attraction, sometimes something from the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire sex; then treat the wound until it heals.
Here is the text translated into modern English:
Hermaphrodites are of two types, like men: the first has both male and female characteristics, with hair and a penis that ejects urine. The second type is like women but has a scrotum and testicles on the penis.
of the testicle
Testicle is a swelling on the natural part, so large that it is unpleasant to look at; some women have them as big as a hand, and it is curable. You should cut away the excess of the testicle with your hand or a knife, and then press it gently; don't cut too deeply though, or bleeding will occur, then cure another wound until it heals; there is also a growth that appears at the mouth of the scrotum, use that and if it pops out, it resembles a cow's udder, and so they called it "cow disease". You should then cut away the testicle as we have said, and cure it until it heals.
of the erratic pulse
Erratic pulse is when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; it can be innate or an accident from illness, or it could be due to an abnormal growth, a subtle hernia, or something else, and it occurs deeply in the scrotum, on the sides, or wherever. It affects conception and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers to come. The knowledge of this is through examination of the scrotum. If the hernia is apparent, you should press it with your fingers or a stick. If it's a subtle hernia, and it's close to the testicles, then do this: place your fingers at the base of the testicles, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then the testicles will be pushed up, so that the hernia is exposed and the opening closed. Take some wool, soak it in oil, and apply it to the area, and have the woman lie down for a day so that it doesn't stick. If the hernia is hard and thick, cut it away with a spatulum similar to bay laurel leaves. If the hernia is from a birth defect, then you should cut it out and apply a tent made of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it heals. And when an abnormal growth occurs in the scrotum, treat it this way, if it's not an inguinal hernia. Because for an inguinal hernia that is in the scrotum, one should not cut it.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows incessantly, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into a tumor; and we have already discussed their types, signs, and symptoms in the previous section. I will now discuss their treatment. I state that both hemorrhoids and tumors, when they appear in the anus and are painful to touch, cannot be cured using a hot iron. Instead, one should place the patient in a cool room, then cut the hemorrhoids with tweezers and pull out their roots, followed by applying a powder of blood-clotting medicines such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense. Next, one should bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, galls, and similar ingredients. Also, prepare a plaster made of barley flour, honey, and garlic, and apply it to her back. If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on her back and breasts without using any iron instruments. Then take a piece of lamb's wool and soak it in plantain juice or dogwood bark infused in old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. The type called "albathir" is reddish and has a rough surface; it should be treated in the same way as the tumor, as mentioned earlier, and then the wound should be healed with ointment until it is completely cured.
of abscesses in the anus
Abscesses in the anus can arise in various ways, including chancres, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, as discussed earlier. Now, I will describe the treatment for a hot abscess that occurs in the anus, which is different from those that heal on their own. If you observe that the abscess is painful, red, and swollen at the beginning of its onset, along with fever, then do not rush to pierce it immediately. Instead, let the pain subside first. Then, make the patient sit on a chair with two small seats where they can lean back and support their back. Their legs should be spread apart, with their arms bent and placed under their knees. Once in this position, suck the anus to open it and insert the instrument used for this purpose, being careful not to go too deep or cause any discomfort. If the instrument is too large, cover the opening of the anus with a cloth to avoid causing any pain. Then, insert the instrument into the anus and apply pressure. Once the abscess bursts, use your hand to feel for any remaining fluid and remove it. Next, place a moist tent over the wound, ensuring that it covers the entire opening and extends beyond the anus onto the perineum. Soak the tent in rosemary oil or rose oil. After two days of treating the wound with appropriate ointments, the patient can be given a cleanse using warm water mixed with honey, followed by water infused with lily roots and aristolochia, which should be applied to the affected area. Return to using the ointment after this cleanse. If there is any pus remaining in the wound, it is necessary to avoid using heat or iron for treatment. Instead, follow the methods described earlier in the text.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of childbirth and its signs: when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the earth, then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth follows nature, and the placenta emerges with the child; and when you see these signs, one should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly. For when it descends headfirst, the placenta comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids through proper purification; and those who come in any other way do not come naturally. For sometimes they come feet first, or outside the body from the chest, hands, or abdomen, or near the navel, and are sometimes turned upside down by chance due to other bad formations; therefore, the midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one should assist.
If the child comes headfirst through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her vitality is weak, then make her sit on a stool or have other women hold her up; and anoint her private parts with oil or fried fenugreek, and then the midwife should insert a little spatulum (as described below) into her: and split the membrane, and squeeze her nail so that the moisture within flows out; and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, you should cleanse the woman's intestines with a poultice of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her sneeze and spit out some condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will now emerge. And if both hands come out, you should gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and support her so that she does not lean forward; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, squeeze the hands with the knife as mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset them in the same way.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes out feet first, you should turn it upside down. and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then grab one of the feet and extend it little by little.
When he jumps up to his knees, instruct him to grasp and make him sneeze repeatedly; if he jumps higher, if God wills it.
And if it is not as we have said, then gradually return it to its natural shape. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take myrrh, and oil of sixes, and gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and put on the woman's nature within and dislodge this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when she is soaked beneath, have her put on a collar of myrrh, and leave it on for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then have her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the infant will now jump out. the infant will emerge onto his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on it little by little.
of the exit of the child who comes out of a width of one hand I must devise to bring back the hand if it cannot be reset, then make the woman walk and lift her up;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed with her legs stretched out straight;
then administer the mustard plaster that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand; and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to grip as hard as she can until the child comes out.
of the baby emerging from his mother's neck, and spreading out his hands, and turning his face towards his mother's back I want the midwife to take hold of his hand, then turn him little by little, gently rocking him;
and when he is upright, she should apply a mixture of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to grip something; then make her sneeze. in the same way with all the membranes
in the same way with all the membranes When it comes out in this way throughout the membranes, then scrape the membranes with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained.
And if the infant can breathe through its mouth and nose, and the membranes are blocking its airways, clear them so that they do not restrict breathing and the infant dies.
Then place the infant inside, ensuring it is in the correct position, and instruct the woman to press down gently on her abdomen several times.
of the discharge of twins You know that twins are often born, and sometimes .iii. or .iv.; and it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. These are strange things, and do not live long;
I know those, that they are multiplied, and are unbound by the pus which divides them, which is attached to the skin.
and sometimes issue as naturally as a boil, as we have said.
And if they issue painfully, then the cure, as we have said, and let the physician be skillful, and quickly and skillfully do what he does. and do thus as it benefits health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measure of the glorious sage,
and it is necessary that the doctor knows all this, because by chance a similar thing might happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a stillbirth as I have described in the section on childbirth, and there is no progress and you must intervene with your hands: you should know whether the woman is of sound mind and not suffering from any phobias that might induce fear of death;
the woman should be laid on her back with her hips tilted downward and her legs raised;
and the midwife applies a poultice of two parts, to be bound on in bed so that it is treated for the descent of the child;
then rub the mother's mouth with moist oils infused with mallow and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks; then they are gently placed in the mother's mouth, then she is given something to bite on so that it does not hurt too much;
and take care that if the child is turned around that it descends onto its head; if they insert thorns into their eyes or nose or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs,
and if the swelling is on the feet, they should be pricked and massaged on the soles of their feet;
and it is necessary to hold the thorn in their right hand, and place the cord between their left fingers, and tie the cord gently all around their hand, and then insert the thorn into one of the places we have mentioned, until they reach the hollow part;
then push against another knuckle, or a third one if you need to, so that the extraction is even;
and then they are pushed against each other in order to extract the tooth, and the knuckles are used for support on both sides, as is the form:
And if a part of it remains, then anoint some of his fingers with oil, and push them into that part, and pull on the other part.
and if nothing remains, then place this knuckle or a higher one in position, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the tightness, you must wrap it in a cloth, as long as it goes;
then the cap on the joint of the palm or wrist, and so you must do in the other hand, and in both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is constricted at the exit, or it has a sharp pain accumulated, If it is necessary for you to stop the spasm, grip the spine between your fingers, press on the head and draw out the water. Or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
And in the same way, if it has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tweezers,
and if the head of the shoulder pops out and is forced back in, it will be split open so that the moisture can escape.
and if it cannot exit, then cut it out in pieces as best you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture can flow out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, and the pulse is light, and the pulse in the throat is weak.
And if it is strained in the belly or the thigh, then you must strain it with one garment wrapped around your hand; and press the belly or the thigh until the moisture that is in it runs out;
and if the other members are dislocated and the head remains, let him put his hand into the wound up to the mouth of the wound; then I put in .I. hook or two, and pulled it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed, one should not work on it, one must apply moist and greasy things; and the doctor prescribes poultices, and bathes in warm water to soften and relax.
And if the child is on its side, and you can get it even, then administer what we have said about a live child;
and if one has no power, then let the child be carried in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if they are affected by what we have said about abscesses that come in childbirth;
and if there is bleeding, let it be stopped with a bandage, and let the other treatments be applied.
And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her belly; then another was sewn on top of it, and the other one died too. After a long time, she developed an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up and opened, causing a foul discharge.
I was called to treat her, and I thought about it for a long time, but couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
I placed strong attracting plasters on her, and some bones came out, and after a few days, some more. I was very amazed because there are no bones in one's belly.
I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
I probed the wound and removed some bones, so that the woman was much improved. and the woman lived a long time like this, and then she suddenly died.
and I have recorded this chapter only because when the masters encounter something strange, they know to seek help.
to bring the dislocation back into place
After that comes the form of the pulley, which is found in books; and with two turns at each of the two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle, made of ivory or boxwood;
and its mouth should be two digits wide, and the edge of the trees one digit, and in length a palm and a half; and in the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are built into the mouth of the saw to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of pliers; and has two heads, two joints, as you see, the length of a palm, and two digits wide;
and when you see to open the wound with all the instruments, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread wide; then put the two joints together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the instrument as you did with the tweezers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the wound, as long as the midwife does what she wants.
These instruments are all surmounted, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the mirors have been prepared, the work is more swift, and men are higher for their quantity.
Do not despair over the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, and you must pinch her nose and mouth shut.Et quant ele vout esternuer, tu t’en vaas ad leus de la gosier et des entres; et si tu troves que ele retint la condisi ou l’alaine, tu la fai boire vin chaud, et si elle ne peuit boire, tu li mets del vin sur la narine. And if she can't drink, put wine on her nose. And if she can't do that, it's still good.
If not, take a pot and make an opening in the lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire; then put one end of the pot into the wound, and the other end over the mouth of the wound,
and let it steam so that the vapors enter the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said. If the pus does not come out easily. And if it persists after this treatment and does not subside, instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sweet fennel or in a poultice of old age, and then let it air dry.
and seek out the second head; and when they have found it, grasp and gradually extend it straight so that the bone does not slip out. But it should be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come out easily.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment for sneezing and for fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not of all that we have said, then beware that you do not make a mistake in treatment;
but it is appropriate that he who is at the mouth of the wound, you should tie him to the thigh of the woman, then you should cleanse with tetrafarmacon ointment;
if she vomits and returns, but still, when she vomits, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and causes pain to the patient.
Then one should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is like this:
And it is made of glass, resembling a pipe, and one puts the small end into the vagina, and the wide end above the fire;
and the smoke goes onto the charcoal, and it remains until it is used up, and one starts again with a new one.
to pierce the uterus
Many children are born with an imperforate anus; instead, they have a narrow, slender opening. If necessary, the midwife should pierce that slender opening with her finger, and not cut it with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to tear it.
Then she should put on wet linen, wine, and oil, and apply a poultice until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will close up again, put a piece of wood in the opening and leave it for a few days, then remove it when the child wants to go into the chamber.
And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then one must cover it suddenly: and it should be treated as we have said about the cane of splint.
of the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from under the fundament are nodular and grow larger as they come from under the fundament, or in the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it opens up and secretes a thick white pus or thin yellow fluid,
and sometimes these are Persian ulcers; and they are caused by either flatulence or belching when the patient belches, and sometimes a fart jumps out.
And if they have ulcers that pierce up to the bladder and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint and the base of the scrotum.
And so one knows a Persian ulcer that pierces the anus and does not pierce through: and you put your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of iron or steel into the ulcer when it is not twisted.
And if there is crookedness, insert a tent of slender splint or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or wind, as we have said: you can be sure that it has not pierced through; then hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula has pierced as far as the bladder or the passage of urine, and urine escapes, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent is inserted up to that point. If there is twisting and pain in the area around it, then it has moved from its place, and medicine or bandaging will not help;
and there is no cure for these piercings other than labor and the folly of those who interfere.
In one that is neither pierced nor old, there is hope of recovery by means of iron, as I have experienced,
and have the patient lie between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of bronze or of wood if there is a bend, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the patient feels it in his anus, then you must insert your index finger,
and feel if the tent has pierced it; and if you feel between your finger and the anus, then you know it is perforated; if you don't work on it then one cannot heal it.
We nevertheless can heal some, but that happens rarely;
and the aid one does, then one scorches the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and he puts it all hot into the fistula, as far as it comes from the anus; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the charred flesh is burned, which resembles a feather of a bird;
and then cauterize with tents moistened in butter until that wound heals, then treat with ointment that hardens and seals.
If it is like this without pus, that is good. If not, it cannot be healed any other way.
And if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone that is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula below the covering of the heart; if the tip of the fistula is at the beginning, and fills up again before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and it will fall; then beware of those charred cars that look like a bird's feather, and nothing remains of them.
And if the vein bleeds, and the blood flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with a medication.
For the fire cautery gathers together two things: namely, the scorching of the charred flesh, and the stanching of blood and the drying up of moisture;
then the treatment of moist tents with butter or ground substances, until the flesh under the burns is healed and the burned cars fall off;
then heal the wound of the sudden, painful, hard, dry boils.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes from the depths of the fundament, and is separated from the body, put in two fingers or the fundaments, and investigate it.
If you feel the tent, and between two is the veil or the membrane, or it is close to piercing, there should be no sign of despair and hope, through the administration of one of three methods:
where you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bone, or if you can, put in tent and treat it as before.
do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue holding the foundation, and let the exudate come out as it will. then treat it, as we have said.
then treat it, as we have said. by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut down to the foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument; then cut out that piece of rotten wood which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study how to restore the wound and stop the fistula from spreading through the body towards the anus: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes they are like this: and when you have put the tent in the fistula, and it is close to the anus on the skin side, take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape: And insert a twisted thread into both, and insert the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is persistent at the edge of the anus, then pull out the thread from that opening as you would insert your finger into the anus.
And pull on the head of the thread and bring the two shoulders together, squeezing them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, as long as the threads draw close to each other and stick;
then heal the wound until it is closed and clean.
If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For one must not bandage a wound that is so deep, but rather heal it, as we have said, until it is clean.Et s’ele est em parfont, si covient le lacement coper, et puis le cure, s’ele est em parfont, tant qu’il soit sanez.
The form of the spine of the thorn that they use to pierce the fistula is very sharp and pointed; and on the other hand not, because one does not grasp what one should not grasp, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood from time to time. And there is one or more of them, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and then a little more yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them in the anus, it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to defecate into chambers, until the hemorrhoids come out, and they become visible; if it is large, you may cut it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull it out by the root;
and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to their moisture, then they can be held with a cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; take them out with your fingers, then crush and powder some hot powders that are in place of cauterization; or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the bowels cannot move, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and sharp enema to clean what is in the bowels so that it can move freely;
when the patients hold their breath, and if the thread is forced out from the bowel, then the treatment is minor; and you should take them with your nail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron.
If you need to administer stitches in this way: take a twisted thread, and thread it onto a needle, then pull the thread above the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread underneath the needle. and tighten the thread firmly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood;
then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest;
and then let it drop, and when they have fallen, then treat them with ointment and other remedies until they heal.
drying from the heat or moisture of the bowels Drying of the bowels often occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
You should cut off the tip of a spatulum or your fingernail and apply it to the sore without letting it touch moisture. then treat it until it is healed as it should be;
and if it cannot heal, then restart the cautery more fiercely than before, until it heals a lot, and let it be scalded; then treat it until it is healed.
where it trembles Ant is a small creature with a stinger under its body, and it goes deep underground.
Sometimes the sting of the ant causes frostbite, and it feels like death, shivering throughout the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a feather from an owl's wing, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this feather on the shivering, until the purple circle around the shivering disappears. Then return your hand to all of the feather, moving it around the shivering, and insert the feather deeply, and pull out the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, make a needle of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be slender beneath and broad above.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound, as it is before the chapter on cautery.
of the form of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or lead; and sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments, according to which they are made for someone.
Those who are administered treatment for children and those who are feeble and in pain are small.
The form of the small and large enema is above wide, where the bellies are tied according to this way:
and it has an untying where the belly is tied, as you see, and the gut is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other.;
and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small openings,
and has between each aperture .I. finger's width of space, then weave into these apertures .I. strong thread of twisted thread in .X. or around, and tie the belly so that it is like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, it lies against the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is all voided, then pull out the clyster and let the patient lie on his side,
and if the medicine wants to go out, let it, as much as it can; and if he sleeps a night afterwards, it is even better help.
And if you enema him for an illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, do it again until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then the enema should be as gentle as for a child;
and this is how to make the gentle enema that will not hurt the skin:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures with hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the location and the cause of the wound.
The objects that cause wounds are from stone, and cutting with a sword and knife, or a spear, staff, or arrow, or similar things.
where they are made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that occur on the neck, or head, or leg, or stomach, or liver, and similar organs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you should quickly doubt a hot abscess: if it makes the head bleeding immediately from the wound, and the bleeding is in the opposite direction of the damaged part;
and prevent the patient from becoming bloated with wine and fatty foods.
And if he does not want to fast, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat;
and place a warm compress on the wound, if there are hot abscesses, soak cotton in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, place it on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by the wind, powder, which I will describe in a little while;
and if it has moved, put some ointments on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword-cut and similar, and the lips cannot be approximated with tenting, then approximate them with suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, from the ribs up.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and gaping, and not holding together except by a thread, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as eggs and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
And if you find skin eruptions, and it is not on the bone, then scrape off all of it, and let it flow out, then heal it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, causing blood to flow without stopping, and it cannot be staunched by remedies, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread. and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should apply this powder that heals as soon as the burn occurs.
And the manner of the powder is thus: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and mix the powder subtly. And apply the wound, and press it firmly, until it is well healed and joined to all his blood;
and then dress it well, and leave it without dislodging, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this from quicklime only, when one does not have the incense or dragon's blood, but the fire should open the wound.
And if the wound has moved the powder, just as it is, put on some of this powder.
but apply some digestive ointments or barley flour paste made with water and honey until it turns yellow. Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And if there is a fracture with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with small pincers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
of the wound on the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and the one on the head, except that the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut.
If it is the nerve, there should be no other treatment than leaving it alone and not putting anything that restricts it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be warm, like hot water washed in cool water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked water also washed in cool water, and other moist stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut it and ligature it, and then treat it until it is healed.Et si li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place.
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then ligature it, and let it be bound, and cauterized if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage is blocked, by which food goes, if it cuts through the cartilage above the Adam's apple, but does not touch the throat itself, then reset it according to its natural shape; and then stretch it gently, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then treat it thus; and if there are pieces of bone, then tie them tightly together as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them be until the wound has healed over them, and let it heal and close up the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder which I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of a wound from a spear or knife
If it is a deep spear or knife wound, and the patient breathes with difficulty: then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that oozes out of it deeply. and return to the body, and heal the wound; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm or tremor comes, nor bad twitching of the limbs, and when you see these good signs, then know that the wound is healed. Then cure it with poultices and other remedies until it is completely healed;
and if it cannot heal and function, then you know there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the chest or back, then treat it as one who is in front;
if it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has cut into the bone, and there are pieces sticking out, then clean the wound and pull out the foreign objects; and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound fester, so that the foreign objects will come out;
and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
the rupture of the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
of the great wound, sometimes the intestine, or the bowels, by which the entrails are exposed;
and sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
because it is harder to sew up the intestines if they are not sewn up gradually, from warm to hot; and because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more with cautery,
and therefore it is better to cauterize the intestine at its own place than at other places. [II.13]
And know that dislocation of the belly occurs in four ways:
the two common dislocations occur in the belly's suture;
and the other dislocation of the body's wounds and two other unique dislocations are common to other wounds;
And yet they are most commonly associated with the belly's suture, and I will describe each one and clarify:
I say that when a wound is small, and there is no intestine protruding, and it can be easily repaired, which is through one of the two methods: or because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with lukewarm water, or you can boil in water squills and cyprus and spice, and rose the intestines until their inflammation is relieved;
and sometimes it makes this restraining wine, and it is changed to a soul for deflation.
And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestines with water or old wine in which herbs have been cooked, because through this, the entrance is blocked by a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, they make a small hole in the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is mud from the river, that one should not cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if you cut inside the curve and not out, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, one puts it back in its natural shape and place, if you have the power, for this is worth it.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. if you must make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and so is the rupture of the belly in one of its two parts put your understanding into this: that the ruptured part be higher than the other;
and thus one should manage both great and minor wounds.
For minor wounds, use what you are skilled in,
then have with you .i minister pity who dyes all the hair on his hand and pulls together the lips; and that is the common way of suturing,
and that is the common way of suturing, and you should pierce an needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leaves a gap of about an inch at the head of the wound, and inserts a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierces the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle,
then draw it out with a double thread around the needle of 1/4 part then join the 2 edges of the wound smoothly,
and then leave 1 digit of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need of the needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: they should therefore be moderate.
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals.
and then cover the heads of the needles with a layer so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and they use tents or cloth over the needles to hold them steady, and let it be until the wound is closed.
and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and is that you join the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the wound together with a needle and a strong, thin thread; And when you have pierced these heads all four together,
And when you have pierced these heads all four together, then put the needle back into the wound in the same way that one sews clothes;
and space between each stitch the thickness of a thumb nail;
this stitching is for men,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
which was made by a knife, was more than a palm wide, and protruded intestines a good two palms long,
and the wound was in his belly. I returned the intestine to where it had been 24 hours before,
and the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And those who saw him believed that he would die, and this was a miracle:
and I did not treat it with ointments, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and applied cotton wool to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Here I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing:
take the needle and thread it from outside to inside;
once the needle has pierced the skin from right to right, then tie off the thread where you threaded the needle;
and have it pierce through from the inside out;
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier sews furs, and that you leave once the edge on one side, and pull it back on the other, until the seam is complete.
The second method of sewing, which Galen describes correctly,
is such that they unite the two parts naturally, and apply one of the chief to the other chief, in such a way:
stick a needle into the nearest vein, and make it pierce only that spot, and leave the two chiefs of the syringe; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part just to the inside, that there are two kinds of dislocation;
then pierce both sides of the part affected up to the chest, in two other places that are on either side;
and this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galen says this, and some testify,
sew up the abdomen with .ij. needles, one in each;
and you must thread one needle from one side and the other from the other, as those who sew up ulcers do;
and know that when there is a rupture in the belly, the stitches will be more painful than in other parts of the belly.
The diagnosis of the wound is the same as for other wounds.
It is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, and the fire has moved it, then put back the intestine and the gut; then put on the cooling powder,
then put back the intestine and the gut; then put on the cooling powder, and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew up the wound, and the navel; then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed.
and if you have no medicine, apply old cotton, as soon as it begins to ooze pus, and change it twice daily until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine for various conditions when wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then you should wet a light linen in warm tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if they feel pain or itching in the testicles, which often occurs, if they are enemaed with warm wine, especially when the itching extends to the intestines;
and it pierces inside; and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small intestine.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it is due to the abundance of veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
And if the fat jumps out of the wound, then put it back inside just like the intestines, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur; because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the wound to ease the extraction when the sutures are removed and the wound is closed.
of the thread
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in any way,
because I saw a man was stabbed in the stomach with a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and discharged fluids, and he experienced both diarrhea and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to my abilities, and I did not cease sutilizing until he was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw that he was healing, I doubted that the patient had an evil in his belly: and there was no evil in him, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experimentarors said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take thread from old testicles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it over the two lips,
then apply another fomentation in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
and then examine the wound. If they pierce the intestines and do not harm the patient,
and one can tie the intestines with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a thin, twisted flax thread, then thread the needle and sew up the intestine, and then pull it back in;
and this way of sewing up the fissure is not useless, according to the path of faith and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal veins, then there is no healing except through subtlety.
of a fistula, wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is generally called a "fistula", and likewise when it is swollen and returns bow-shaped.
And a fistula is according to the verdant nodulation, a hard and white swelling, where one does not feel pain, and is also swollen like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not cleaned and has no pus, this is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its malice; or because there is hard charcoal within, and on the lips, that does not allow blisters to form; or because there is too much phlegm; or because the wound is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality; or medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region is tardy in digestion, and slow in health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones:
I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments for this disorder in the section on diseases of the head.
Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is performed manually.
You should know that a fistula can occur anywhere in the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the sinus, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the sides, or the spine in the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this way are of grief sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to where I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it, take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a thin, flexible tent made of lead, because lead bends and moves around the curvature.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot explore it well with tenting, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
because moisture travels from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then seek bleeding at your discretion, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is cut through deeply,
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand down, and where he feels it most.
and once you know the exact location of the dislocation, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the places I've just described, then treat it according to what I've instructed.
or in any of the places I've just described, then treat it according to what I've instructed. and remove any putrid flesh and rotten matter within. and then the treatment until it is healed.
And if the fistula is deep and in a good place, you must dig it out as deeply as you can, then put moist tents in the medicine until it reaches the head of the fistula,
then put moist tents in the medicine until it reaches the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then I apply warm compresses until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve troubles you in the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then treat it until the decay is completely removed, then clean it with warm water as long as it is necessary;
and if it is not healed and becomes swollen again as before, you should know that you have not gone to the spring:
If you uncover and desire as much as you are deep then remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other cause than weariness of nature
and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if the extraction has an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, pull them all out, not leaving one behind,
and if moisture causes it harm, and there is no error or fear, then cut and burn the moistness, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something caustic over the wound, and let it sit until the pus has run around the bones,
and then they will have easier access to the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as those in the leg or thigh, then only remove the corruption until all of the darkness has been eliminated, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large amount of decayed matter in it, and it comes up to the bone; one must scrape and cover all of it up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and assistance from it in your work.
There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body
so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to pierce it to open it.
but the doctor through his folly operated so much that the abscess opened, and much matter came out of it, and it became a fistula, and there were many wounds that all bled and discharged moisture from the body;
and many put off treatment for around two years, and no one had any skill in the art of medicine,
until I was called there, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and that which flowed from the holes in great quantity; and became red the body of the young man, and had a yellow colour.
I pitched a tent at one of these holes, and then searched all the holes,
and found that some came across from others in all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and dug into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, with corruption coming up to the bone inside;
I saw what appeared to be rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
And I began to heal the wound with hot medicine for a long time, but it would not heal.
And then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found that the corruption was continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then tried to heal the wound;
but I could not until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and the pain left completely. Then I treated it with medicine; and he was healed and sewn up quickly,
and the operation did not need to be repeated except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of my fear of death that I had for him. Because through the evacuation of blood he often bled, but he was completely healed.
Because through the evacuation of blood he often bled, but he was completely healed. and there grew a hard lump in the place of the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or discomfort anywhere, neither when walking nor standing.
and hold the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh towards the bottom, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to cut, so that the blade doesn't cut into the flesh; and place a hot brand or a flat object under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and one must work as long as possible until one can see and smell the corruption, then stop.
And if the bone is rotten and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, cut away all the flesh; then place a hot brand under it,
and then bring the two parts of the broken bone together, and let the healing take place from the end of the break, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the joint, and let the bone where it is corrupted heal from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no need to cut, except for the corruption itself;
and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, and it is very serious, but you should still examine this erosion, how it appeared to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve;
and know that the knives and probes for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, one must prepare an instrument for each type of procedure.
And you should know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the illnesses; if you consider the instrument which you need according to what is appropriate for it.
of fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external forces.
And when you have applied that corrosion through the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then you must treat the shoulder joint; it is necessary to cover that member up to the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes through the sky from death, or through malice, which is greater, because of the fault in the limb;
so that the patient escapes through the sky from death, or through malice, which is greater, because of the fault in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so it seems to be burned by fire, and after the darkness comes the corrosion of the limb from one member to another, and affects throughout the body; so you rush to the head,
and if it is through the sting of some venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and adder and similar,
if the bite is on the head or neck, then cut it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, cut at the joint so that the sting does not go into the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and it is not appropriate to reduce them below a certain amount due to its virtue;
and thus one proceeds when the erosion occurs in the foot: if it occurs in the first joint, then one treats the next joint afterwards;
and if it occurs in the foot, then one treats the entire foot; and if it goes up the leg, then one treats at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient.
and the way to cover the limb with a cloth or bandage is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's hand down from the lower ligature, and another minister's hand up from the upper ligature, and you loosen the skin between the two ligatures to one and a half spans wide, so that the bone is exposed;
then the cautery or silk, and place a linen drape on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin and bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the wound gently, or you can apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals.
and I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
he had a darkness that looked like a burn from fire,
and this corrosion started first on his toe of the foot, so much that it discolored all the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he stopped covering his feet, and was healed;
and long after that, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me,
and I applied striking remedies after purification of the body, but he could not stop the corrosions;
and he wanted me to cover his hand, but I did not want to because I had no hope of striking the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die. for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have never heard of anyone doing otherwise if they had need of it.
Sometimes an abscess occurs in a fleshy place, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and drains, and the place remains hollow, just like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a delicate cloth, and it does not heal up to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sore",
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in an open wound, then it is called a "fistula".;
and the cure is to cover the entire sore, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth.; And do not fear for its corruption.
And if you have confidence that the skin is burning, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus with a clyster:
observe whether the breasts are large and the pus in them has an evil-smelling odour, then cleanse with an Egyptian medicine made thus: take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in .i. vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and enema the breast, and constrict the orifice; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this as many times as necessary, until the breasts are deflated and the pain is relieved;
and sometimes they are enema with ashes water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you burn vine wood ashes, and pour water over it,
then let it flow, and enema until you know that the breast is well healed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ashes water, then enema with water and honey in which there is a little litharge powder; or you can enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and wine makes blood flow;
and when you have done this, and are confident that the wound is clean, if it cleanses by causing a bowel movement,
and you press out the pus with a syringe, and they treat it with a poultice made of rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments.
and if the opening of the breast is small and the catheter cannot enter, enlarge it with a needle, and insert a tent made of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged enough;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut it to just the size where the catheter can enter,
and if the hole that drips downward is on top, then cut above or below where it is. For when the bowel is perforated, it doesn't allow food to pass through; and if you cannot cover the wound below as you wish, so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach.
and if you cannot massage the breast from below as you wish, then move the bowels gently downward, and leave nothing in them. and take strengthening medications to put over the chest,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire chest; then press firmly on the nipple of the breast a bit harder than before, then apply ointment to another cloth according to the amount of discharge from the nipple, and placed it over the aperture of the breast to relieve the bowels, and did not loosen the large bandage until after many days once;
and that which is above the aperture of the breast, often remove to relieve the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is poison, pus or sufficient, digested or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that jumps over the opening of the breast, you know that the milk is coming out, and approach the saints;
and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change to another garment, and renew the ointment.
And if milk flows from the breasts for many days, know that the breast is not averted. And if subtle venom flows after a long time, do not despair of health,
because health is approaching. For there are people who have slow healing in their wounds, and those that heal quickly;
and if milk flows from the breasts for many days, know that the breast is not averted;
and if the breast is slow to heal, and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect. just as an ointment that has a diaphanous quality, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the most effective medicine.
Take the diaphanous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine;
then cook it and use it. Also, make honey candy thickened, when a final judgment is not present,
take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them up and mix the powder with honey over fire; and then smear it on a cloth, and apply it to the chest, and sometimes administer a long aristeologus, and roots of celandine, which is like flour of beans and centaury;
and roots of celandine, which is like flour of beans and centaury; and use simple or composite drugs: grind them, make them into powder, and apply them to the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes impressions in the bone, or in hard tissues, or in soft tissues; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, caused by a wound or injury. It can also occur on the toe, although this is less common. The condition is characterized by inflammation and the formation of pus beneath the nail, which can cause discomfort and even pain. In some cases, the nail may separate from the nail bed, allowing for the accumulation of pus underneath. Treatment typically involves draining the abscess to relieve pressure and promote healing. It's important to address panarice promptly to prevent further complications. or from an injury to the foot, or perhaps it arises in other places;
and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then a large abscess develops, and run and flow low until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will reach all the way.
and the corrosion reaches to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is twice as large, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the surplus growth from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to grow out, and the bleedings you should put the thread under the nail so that it doesn't press against the flesh, and the bottom up, and strike that subtle and gently, and put on top of the remaining skin burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then strike it and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the tooth decay, cut it with a chisel as mentioned earlier, then fill it until it is healthy;
and if it is decayed, and hollow, and it hurts a lot, then you must heal it first; then cut the nail with a chisel, cutting diagonally across the top,
and ensure that the incision does not go all the way to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
if it happens, put something on top of it that soothes.
The joints of some people's hands by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone where there should be flesh, and occasionally there is bone where there should be nail.
and sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or from the knuckles on the fingers. Those that grow from the knuckle of the finger do not move, and those that grow from the joint of the finger sometimes move;
the cauterization of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cauterize it at the root with a wide spatula.
He who was born in the root of the joint is painful to cure: you must hold the cupping.
In one who is born in the rectum, it is necessary for you to first cup the fleshy part roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable silk, then heal it until it is healthy.
The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or similar things.
You should cut the suture, so that the joints can heal according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or moistened clothes in rose oil, so that they do not bond together; or you place it between two thin pieces of wood, so that they are sewn together as they should be.
If it comes to one of his hands with the palm, then sew up that wound as it should be.
Of the poor
Wounds are large, wrapped, and full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many parts of the body.
and more occurs in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil oil.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is where you make incisions and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
The surgery is performed as follows: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the veins are dilated. then hold the leg from above the thigh down to just below the knee; then open a vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood has come out as the patient can tolerate;
and then the scurvy, and he is ordered to eat meat seasoned with black holly;
and repeat the bloodletting and bleeding when the veins are full, which helps the patient.
The raising of the limb is as follows: lift the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then place it in hot water, and raise the leg until it turns red, and open the veins;
and if you do not have any bandages, heat them in the fire and then apply them to the vein from above on the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin at the joint, and scorch the vein on both sides until it bleeds when you press it.
and when it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then press down on the vein from below, until it is raised out of the skin, and then it can be pressed at the joint easily;
then cut in another place above by three fingers; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then ligature the vein, as you have done before, and bind it with another hook, as you did before;
then cut another vein, or several if needed, then ligature it, and cut the vein in the foot,
then draw and ligature it until the second cut; then extract it from cut to cut, until it is all out, then cut it;
and if you cannot milk and raise it, then insert an needle tied to a strong double thread, and tie it and pull it, and put it under a rod, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not slip, for if it slips, then one cannot milk or raise it, and it brings harm to the patient;
and when you have milked it completely, then place on the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, you should split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
you should split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron with which one covers the vein should be curved, but not cutting, so that it does not cut into the vein;
and is of a large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein; but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of civil bleeding
This bleeding is restricted to the legs, in warm climates where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
It may also occur elsewhere on the body, and this happens with pustules that form beneath the skin,
such as snakes and worms that grow inside the body between the skin and the flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then change the site, and start the vein coming out, just as a plant's root.
When the shoulder opens, you must wrap around it a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half fingers wide, and tie it off,
and let the linen hang down to the leg, and every time it falls away from the body, wind the linen around the body again, and tie it off; and if it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap the rest around it, but do not cover the root while it is growing out; for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pustules where it is, and a serious illness;
for this reason it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing of it remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when it is opened, is as long as five or ten palms, and one man came to me, from whom it grew ten palms in length, and when you cut it off, it bled one drop or opening, and it was perceived all the way to the bottom,
so that all of it came out; and the matter within was evacuated, and in the place were applied healing remedies for several days, then it was cured as with abscesses.
And sometimes there are many wounds, and especially when they open at the joints of the feet or on the feet, and from which much pus flows; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen:
And it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, going up and down all over the body, and it feels like burning as it moves from member to member until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
and is caused by the putrefaction of some humours, such as come up in worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly;
and one doubts its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and that happens many times.
When you see it being treated and bled, one cannot help but wonder what it feels like when it bites:
then you must tie the area above and below with a strong, tightly bound ligature.
then cut above and draw it out forcefully, and if the blood is flowing inside the flesh, and you cannot stop it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding.
and the most harmful things that it does is that it makes the eye water, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then press underneath it firmly, then grab it and pull it out.
and one should use a purifying treatment for the body with soluble medicines to eliminate bad humors.
and beware of fermenting meats that cause putrefaction.
About the pain that comes from flatulence: This disease is called "vachair" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then travels from one limb to another; I saw this with my own eyes.
I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it move up as if it were a worm at the shoulder, as quickly as anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain leaves that area and moves into the shoulder,
and then a little later runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw her.
I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this disease progress in this manner. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I had not seen it as I did in the woman;
and I thought that it was because women have soft bodies and uncovered breasts, and for this reason appears that compulsion of wind.
And it is not apparent according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and closed veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the vein above and below is dry, and then apply pressure until that compulsion of wind leaves its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the cure is for those who fart wind, as with stinking pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they land.
Their diversity is such that there are those with large points, small ones, and also flat-headed and hooked. and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and those that dislocate in a limb do so in two ways: either in a principal limb they dislocate,
such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls therefore on any part of these members, and you see the signs of death that I shall tell you hereafter, you must be careful to extract this arrow, for death follows in many cases. And if you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not deep inside, then pull it out and treat the wound.
The sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and goes through to the brain, and the cerebrospinal fluid leaks out on top of the brain, is when there is scorching and swelling and blisters and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of senses, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps he loses his senses, or his hearing; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and and there is white moisture from the wound, resembling pus, and also blood clots; and
and if these signs appear, then take care of it, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck inside.
The signs of the seventh when it falls or turns, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were stuck in a hard object, not hollow. and perhaps the seventh turns just like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting. then know without a doubt that death is coming.
And the signs of the wound that never leave the chest are foam-filled bile coming from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and high panting, and chilliness leaving.
And if the arrow pierces the sole of the foot, it affects the small bones; and causes great swelling and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulder are moved.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance something indigestible might jump out from the wound.
And if the arrow pierces the belly, and nothing comes out through the rectum but feces, then there is little hope for a cure or for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him in the cheek or the jaw, at the root of the teeth: I probed it, and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any pain.
And draw an arrow through the eye of a needle which has fallen into the fat of the eye below the membrane below. and the arrow was re-inserted and could not reach it except for its tip towards the forest, and the arrow was as big as an arrow from a Turkish bow, about .i. foot long with a light wooden shaft; the jaw was healed and no bad accident happened to him.
And draw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab in origin with ears:
I shaved the beards, and I applied subtle remedies until they were cured and the Christians recovered.
And I extracted an arrow from a man that was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die.
And then, after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut around the arrowhead, dislodged it, and extracted it, and he experienced no adverse effects.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sewn up above it;
and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural habits, and does not experience any harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remain thus without great pain; and many others similarly.
And an arrow struck a man of the royal family, the king's nephew, in the eye and was slightly tilted to the right; and the arrow was fully inserted
I was called to attend after she had been struck for 3 days. I found the wound very tight.
I tried her with every subtle test, but I didn't feel anything. and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on the wound an astringent and digestive poultice, so that the swelling would go down; and revealed the location of the arrow.
and revealed the location of the arrow. I applied the ointment again and opened the wound directly, and the patient remained in this state for a long time.
until he felt the arrow inside his shoulder; and he told me so. I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound directly, until it was opened,
I examined it, and felt the tip of the arrow which protruded from the wound; then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow became visible;
and it healed well in about four months,
and then I lanced the wound that I had pinched with tweezers, and it bled from both sides but could not come out;
then I ceased not to devise and contrive instruments until I made them .i. pair of tongs well made according to what their shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I treated and restored the wound.
And those who have experience judge that cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
I will now tell you about the extraction of some arrows. so that you may apply my advice to those cases which I do not describe, for books cannot encompass everything;
but wise doctors understand a little about many things, and about what they know and what they lack, they discover new remedies and instruments, and the downward path of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows enter the members where they are stuck according to two methods: either by the place they enter or by another route;
and that which goes out by the same place it entered is an arrow entering through fleshy parts, and sometimes it goes out immediately.
And if it does not go out immediately, leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes rotten, and relieve the exit;
and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it like that for a few days, and move it every day;
and then it will pop out, and if it does not, then pierce around the entire nail with a thin needle until the area around the nail is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged within the body where it cannot be seen, then it will go to all parts of the body. and if you can feel it, then draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then open the wound as wide as necessary; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs in the arrowhead so that it holds fast.
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs in the arrowhead so that it holds fast. if you can, cut away the flesh that is pierced through by the bone in two places. and then break or fold back the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out.
and then break or fold back the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out. and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot at once, then leave it until around the nail it becomes soft, then pull it out, for its extraction is easy. And if the flow of blood makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and put on a poultice as you are able to gently pull out the arrow without danger,
either quickly or slowly, either firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow hit him, for it is the greatest help if you can, and if not, then follow what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from another source, or where there is an opening in them, or the skin is swollen and obvious, either seen or felt:
Cut away at it with tweezers as much as they can hold, then pull it out; if it will not come out now, leave it.
And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand around, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now, and then try again to extract it until it comes out.
and if it is an arrowhead, remove the entire arrow;
and if the shaft is broken, and you see fit to administer a poultice, then apply it with a broad cloth, so that the point of the arrowhead enters into the wound; and then pull it out,
and if the arrow is stuck, put .1 instrument with a pointed end into it to aid in extraction.
And if the arrowhead has penetrated, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, as much as you can. then treat the wound as it should be done.
And if the arrow hits in the leg or abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it is deep, and you can cut above it, then cut.
and guard against cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, then cut the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird; see the illustration:
There are many varieties: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins from which one heals are .xxxi., of which it has or head xvi.,
that is to know: .ij. batants which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the  .ij . arteries which are in .ij. temples apparent; and .ij  veins that are in the .ij  lids of the .ij eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called 'augerich'. and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are .v. in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side of the neck, and common people call it the "neck vein"; and the middle one is called the  "fast", and is made up of the cephalic and basilic veins; and common people call it the   "heart vein"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side of the neck, and they call it the common people "wound of the belly", and it is above the navel, and is the one that heals, which opens clearly above the pouch.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch of the left side, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with migraines; and the quality of the bleeding, as I told you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the bleeding, as I told you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck with a rope, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places, depending on the head. then grab them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse underneath your finger, press hard;
then take the lance, and stick it under the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand up along the vein, and cut through the skin and fascia well .2 times with the knife, and make the blood come out until you see it;
then pull and tie it, so that it heals;
and I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples, if it is worth an old emigraine, and dryness, and habitual blindness, and the body of tears ague to the eyes;
and the qualities of the healer are as I say: and the disease pulls his neck, so that both veins are clearly visible; and feels pain in his stomach, and then signs inside;
then lightly press the skin above the vein with your thumb, and insert the lance underneath. and gently open the vein at the top, and milk it, just as you did with the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their bandaging and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness.
and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "plunger", of which this is the form:
And put the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out according to the amount you want. then loosen the collar, and ligate the vein until it is healthy and sometimes the work is done with a broad flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and ligate the vein crookedly, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are delicate.
The ligature of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with thorns, and with tetter, and with ringworm, and with eye-ail, and with facial ailments;
and the nature of their ligature is such that the patient should twist his neck in torture by some bond, as before;
then cleanse it, and let the wound be cross-shaped, a little longer than wide, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are thin, they may break; then stop the bleeding, as much as you need to, and then bind it with a linen bandage, and tie it well.
The wound of the vein of the nose is useful for nosebleed, and for bleeding in the eyes, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient squeezes his neck, then squeeze his nose with your left hand, take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein will not open well, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
The juice of 2 onions helps with the constriction of the windpipe, and with inflammation, and many other illnesses, and with impetigo, and ulcers, and herpes, and stomachaches;
and the properties of the juice are such that it pulls the neck out from under both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient lie on his back,
then cleanse the vein from which blood flows profusely, then draw out blood temperately, as much as is necessary.
then do the same in another vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently press all the veins, so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
On bleeding from the lips The salves for sores on the lips above also help with ulcers in the mouth, and gum decay, and lip splits, and inner and outer lips.
And the quality of the salve is to make the patient sit in front of you, and stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and distinguish them by their darkness, and by the fact that around them are small black veins: take one from each side; if you do not recognize them and are unsure,
take one from each side; if you do not recognize them and are unsure, take the largest from each side, and similarly do the same with the two veins above and below; it is the same procedure.
On bleeding under the tongue: Bleeding the veins under the tongue aids after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and examine the quality of the blood; let the patient hold his tongue out and look underneath each side for a black vein.
examine both, but do not probe too deeply, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm from which blood is commonly drawn are treated in two ways:
or with a very broad needle, an olive-shaped one with a sharp point, called «anesil».; and are wide and narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the flame of the myrtle is very famous, and is wide as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth, full of thick blood, and contain thick and troubled blood; and the shape of the flame is like an olive tree:
and is more pointed, and is for bleeding the veins gently, where there is thin yellow blood.
Bleeding at the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and the bleeder must bleed gently, and be wary of the artery below. And if he pierces the artery, and there is a gushing of blood, then he must stanch it, as I have said; and the flame should not grip him, but burn him like a torch.
And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you may want a vein from him, or you can heal in his place the vein in the arm: it will open clearly; and apply the flame like a torch, as we have said.
And if you wish to find the site of bleeding, you must therefore stretch out the arm and touch it so that you can feel the pulse. Then mark the spot with a sign, then tie up the arm, and then apply the flame cautery.
And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot puffed up, for that is the artery; avoid it therefore.
And if you see it bulge upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, then know that it is artery blood: So you therefore hasten and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops as often happens.
hold the arm and leave it thus and not move it until he is healed. And be in fear and not move him until he is better.
And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints and medicine is not present, then press on the artery above where it is cut and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fir wood, split it, and take one half and bind it on firmly until the next day.
if he stops bleeding, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders which stop bleeding.
and the stopping of bleeding is not difficult in various positions because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
The vein in the middle helps it to bleed from the top above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful for the nerve that lies beneath, and not to pierce too deeply, and he must find the nerve, and inflames and the nerves are injured, and by chance may not heal;
and this nerve opens in many people, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you should heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid hurting the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is bleeding between the two nerves, they will make a long cut.
The wound of the head, if it bleeds from the scalp, and helps the eyes.
And it is necessary to wound with the flame of an olive branch or myrtle, for that is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place, and not hurt anything if one misses the first time, and one tries again. And by chance, some men's parts may become inflamed when one misses the first time, but it does not hurt at all. The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health.
and to prevent illnesses from occurring; and it should be performed in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating when the signs of fullness appear.
and one should bleed on the first or third day after a wound.
The bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but when the need arises day or night, at all times and in all weathers.
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh month. They should not bleed those who are over sixty years old.
And when someone wants to be bled in any way, they should first cleanse the bowels with a gentle enema. If he has retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful excess fluids from the intestines to the principal limbs;
Nor should he bleed those who are too full from meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the water-bound;
and if one of them has colic after diarrhea, and vomiting, and abdominal discharge, and frequent sexual intercourse, and from exertion, from waking and fasting, and from all that depletes the body, either through weapons or through the body itself;
then subtly withdraw the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
Then enter the bath, if nothing else weakens him, to subtilize the blood,
and heal the vein around the penis, as we have said;
and avoid work, strain, and lust, and similar things;
and be naked and lying down, with the patient above those who are healing him, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then tighten the bandage firmly but not too tightly, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not work.
And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
then wet the tourniquet with the flame of a little old oil, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein below where he wants to cauterize, so that the vein does not bleed and fail when he is cut. For there are veins which flow like cords when cauterized, and some which are filled with winds, so that when one puts it under the flame, it draws back from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with some.
and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow for this purpose, therefore the surgeon must be skilled in such matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, try again a little lower at the same site or above it, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is fearful, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. Perhaps warm pustules will form; do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes.
and if the orifices are small, then let the blood flow gently and if you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then apply direct flame to that orifice itself;
and work on it gently so that the wound is not inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area inflamed, do not restart the bleeding and place a little linseed oil on it, for linseed oil lightens the body of blood and is soothing in this case.
and thus administer the linseed oil in every bleeding that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and it makes a lump and bulge out of them, when one is put in place; so subtly the blood separates and disperses when it is too large.
And if there is a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when it has not been lanced before the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, put a sponge soaked in lukewarm water and salt on the affected area and hold it there for an hour;
and you should do this after the blood comes out of the vein, and if it remains in place for several days, there will be no harm; and if you see, place on it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in juice of calendula officinalis, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance at the bleeding of basil: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Avoid therefore placing on it anything of what we have mentioned, for perhaps it cuts into an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its amount and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And one must make a larger wound in a person who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, and let the flames be wide.
And one must bleed a weak person in a different way, and they should be bled a little and often, and they should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding is safe from bloodletting and cutting of nerves, and it is better than letting the blood flow long or hard.
And to one whose body needs cleansing, give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is scorched, then draw out blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, he should eat moistened bread in sweet wine before the cleansing, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during the cleansing, after the flow of blood, he should inhale the scent of warm broth and subtle, aromatic syrup,
and use the other remedies we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for opening the veins.
And if he wants to wound his arm and bleed again, as needed, when it is weakened by heavy bleeding, let him bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength, continuously.
And whoever wants to wound his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, let him bleed on the second or third day.
Because there is a great deal of blood within the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore one must draw out a large quantity, and widen the orifice so that it drips into a pitcher; then you have inspected all the signs of healing, and place your hand over his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come upon him from this pain and this often happens when the healer is negligent;
and you must not press hard upon it when you see the arm dislocating and blood issuing out a second time, and the wound is closed, nor if it is crooked so that he extends his arm suddenly, for this would be harmful;
but let it until it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is frozen in the vein comes out. and put on .a little. piece of salt cloth wetted in vinegar, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and don't bind it, until the abscess is settled.
And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healed in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the wound turns red;
then let him be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the middle, not from the broad or long side;
and the slit should be wide, and it should be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if the pus cannot come out, put the hand in hot water again and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, do not soak the hand in hot water, for one puts it there more in winter than in summer.
and the vein of this vein is saved more from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve in it.
The vein of the救命 of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
Press the hand, and soak it in hot water until the vein is swollen; then release it. and if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it from all sides, it won't hurt at all;
and don't go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath,
and then put the hand in hot water if the pain is frozen in the wound and can't come out.
And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to close it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The bleeding in the left hand is useful for the disease of the mice, and do everything as I told you about the right.
Bleeding from the ear is useful for all diseases that are beneath the body. as well as diseases of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and old diseases of the hips, thighs, and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should put his foot in warm water and rub the wound until it bleeds, and put it on top of the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot they go a lot of veins;
then tie it on the largest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you tie it on the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are underneath, and tie it across also as though cutting; and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if it fails the first time, try again a second time on top of the first cut, for the wound is salty. Do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and do likewise to the big toe on the other foot.
The location of the sciatic nerve is at the back of the leg; its treatment is good for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the nature of its treatment is such that the patient lies on his back and twists upwards at the ankle four times.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better to leave it as it is, for the place is safe, and it is very painful for many people.
and it is better to leave it as it is, for the place is safe, and it is very painful for many people. And if you do not treat it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you want, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and compress it; now it is healed.
Of bleeding with leeches
Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this bleeding without striking is in two ways: either it is all fire, or without fire;
and two more on either side of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on the shoulders, and on the hips; and the cupping glasses in both arms, and in both legs; and suction cups on both ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood except from small veins that are dispersed throughout the body,
and therefore it weakens one no more than bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered, nor with any heat or burning sensation, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if, out of necessity or habit, one must be bled, then let it be done every hour at the beginning and end of each month, and throughout all seasons.
for there are those who, when they need to fart, have a heavy head;
and others who experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and dimness of sight.
and others who spit up a drop of blood, have a swollen tongue, and taste blood; and there are those who dream, and see through the night blood and wounds, and die, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order him to fast for three hours after daybreak.
Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this bleeding is in place of the headache,
and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;
and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
And those who often recover from it become obese, and for this reason, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower due to the risk of obesity.
Cupping on the neck is in the area of the head and basil, and for this reason, it is useful for the constriction of the feet, and for splitting of the canal of the lungs, and for coughing, and for congestion;
and it must be pushed out a little, because if it holds too tightly, it injures the bowels, stomach, and heart.
Ventilation from the two ribs of the neck is good for headache, and eye pain, and brain pain, and strangulation, and tooth root pain,
and it is in the place of bleeding from the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it so that he does not compress the artery and cause a gush of blood.
Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The windings of the sides are also worth as much as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from those large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the place is naked of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath.
The cupping glass which is on the buttock is good for varicose veins and for diseases underneath, and it must be a large cup made of brass, which needs to be applied with great care; and if it were too thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from throughout the body and are good for old pains in the bones and joints, and the bladder, and restore the flow of fluids; they are located at the sides of the two knees and ankles, and over time they weaken the body and bring about fainting in many cases.
The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area become red and swollen, and the blood vessel appear; then release, and re-apply the cupping glasses, and be mindful of the condition of the body, for there are those who have very sensitive skin, and small pores: so one should suck only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, one should suck twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we want to draw a little blood, we prick only once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we prick repeatedly; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the ends are such that the skin is suddenly pierced,
and for those with thick and tough skin, and who have small pores, you should anoint the places where the leeches will be placed with an astringent and dissolving oil. if it is on the testicles, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is on the eye, use oil of watercress, or of lily, or chamomile, or similar.
And if the surplus is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if the one we are healing has soft skin and large pores, then no oil should be used,
but should be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from their bed, or from water of myrrh, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses arise from old wine, or water of succory, or infusion of aniseed or camomile, or other similar things;
and one should not bleed with a leech before the bath or enema, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after bleeding,
and it is necessary that he should fast when he is to be bled and when he has been bled. And beware of those who are sick with cholera, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed; if they should eat cool things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods;
and drink possets, and warm milk, and moist meats.
And those with a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and mild, aged wine, and warm milk, and possets, and pouters and young birds;
and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men triacle or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main members; and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The leeches that are put on without bleeding are those that are put on the liver, and the mouse, and the podagra, and on the belly and the gut, and the rain, and the hip, because these members do not tolerate bleeding on their eyes,
and is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place cups on breasts when they are healthy; to reduce viscosity in the member, as we place cupping jars on the belly and chest to diminish the member;
and it reduces pain, when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power, the obstruction may be removed, or the stone depart from its place;
and thus it does when placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the lungs, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or with water in which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And it has 2 inches of width and half a palm of depth, and it has on the side around the middle a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl,
and is of iron, gently applied so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle there is a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle,
and they are both large and small according to the illness and age of those who take them;
because the leeches of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And one must thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
take a candle of wax or a ointment, and place it inside the cupping glass through the tube which is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame be at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers must be upon the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, they can go the vapors, and one removes the cupping glass;
and apply the poultice as before, and reapply it frequently if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is used for diseases of the lungs, for all kinds of pains, there is neither a rod nor an opening, and it is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed on the affected member alone.
and this is its shape:
Leeches are applied only to small parts of the body where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their size, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas. and remove their clothing, as with women or children, and others similarly.
and the nature of this medicine is such that when you find leeches in clean, fresh water without mud, then take them;
and place them in fresh water until they are hungry and have nothing in their stomachs; then cleanse the vein and use a cupping glass, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
and when they are flat and swollen, if it is possible to put a cupping glass on them, then one should, for this is much better.
If not, then raise the part with ease, and then with water, very gently, and then press it out;
and if the part is too painful after the bite of the snake, then wet .a. linen cloth in cold water and place it over the wound until the swelling is reduced;
and if the bite is multiple, then place vitriol powder, or gall, and similar things over it until it is reduced;
or you put raw peas on the area, leaving them until they are cold, and it will now stop bleeding.
and if you need more, take more leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then wipe the fresh blood from the area, or prick it with a needle until the leech attaches. Then place them on the area, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
and when you see them defecate, then powder over a bit of aloe and ground salt, or ash, and they will stop right away.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter;
and for this reason medicine is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and know nothing about it except from the study of ancient books, in which I have delved to acquire knowledge, and through experimentation, and by observing others throughout my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to someone, you should quickly examine the patient on both sides, if anything holds them back, such as weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly.
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool joints, and deer and goat meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or swelling in the affected limb; then return the patient to their previous treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling and粘性, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig stomach, offal, fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.Et li carnes qui sont de colde norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger a grant fin, ou il ait grand besoin; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu chaut et colde, s’il le pot eviter. And meats that are of cold nature should be eaten in moderation, or when there is great need; because a broken bone does not want to stay in a hot and cold place if it can be avoided. For with cool swelling, bruises heal faster.And the meats which are of hot norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger en petit quanitite et en grant fin ou il ne se veult mie demourer; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu colde et chaut s’il le pot eviter.
And know that broken bones of the old and the decrepit cannot be well set or healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
But do not worry, reset the broken bone with a large tendon that stretches and joins the limb together, so that it enforces as it was before; and do not stop entirely from his work, and for this reason, one should nourish with coarse meats, as we have said.
And know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures. For there is one fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, as with the point of a writing quill.
For there is one fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, as with the point of a writing quill. And if it is a fracture with a wound, then it is all one small split.
And in each manner, there is its own method and appropriate instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
For there is known to be the fracture of the bone by what the place is twisted, and it appears well by displacement, and sounds when pressed by the hand;
and when there is no crookedness nor pain to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no fracture;
but there may be crookedness, or fissure, or slight fracture. You should not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are mentioned below, and then hold it firmly and gently.
And you should know that fractures that go into the bone, and are the two parts disjoined, they should now be put in an equal point, just as in apatites;
and if cold abscesses come, let them alone for a day until the abscesses are soothed; then put it in the same state as you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it steady, as is appropriate hereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you bring them back together with all your skill and care, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and join the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it with your hand if it does not seem right; then set it well, and do not twist or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the joint is set, then instruct the patient well not to move it, not while waking or sleeping, not turning or in any other way; and be sure that the joint is so secure that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one should put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one should put him in such a position that he feels no pain. and keep him straight so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Because there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: so you must wrap linen cloth that is soft and thin.
And for larger limbs, such as thigh and leg: you must wrap with a wide and firm bandage, because the wide bandages embrace all of the large limb, and constrict it evenly on all sides, so that there is no swelling.
Then wind light bandages around it 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all of the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less, so that the dislocation is moved away a little.
And soften the bandage a little bit by bit, as long as you press most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around directly on the dislocated area.
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first hour above;
then put between the ligatures cotton or linen pads so that they are all even, then tie it all with a bandage above, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot on the abscess to soothe it, and to reduce the swelling, leave it for a few days;
then hold over your splints, and they should be of a medium-sized cane or of the wood that cleavers are made from, or of palm branches, and they should follow this shape:
but it is necessary for the star that one puts on the break to be a little larger and broader than the others;
and be as long as it behooves the member of smallness or greatness;
then tighten on the stars as you did at the first hour, then tie it with a thread similarly, as you did at the first hour over the break;
the tighter it is, the less it hurts; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft flax;
because if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their laces from cords of flax, which is a great error, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads' thickness between each eyelet.
And if the patient is sore between the eyes of the stars after the stretching in their healthy state, then place under them linen pads or woolen bandages so that they do not blister.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not good to dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the member is large, it is not advisable to place splints for more than five or seven days, or longer according to the severity of the hot abscess;
And here is the way of the ancient plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take flour that is stored on the walls of the mill, and make a paste with plenty of egg, and use this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and it is the common way of the plaster that restores the fracture in many dispositions, especially in women and young children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take 3 barley grains and ladani and inula and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 10 grains; aloes, 5 grains; alechil, 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it helps many people.
Another way of plaster that helps with twists: take myrrh and vismalvas, each 10 grains; aloes, 8 grains; açaç, 6 grains; Armenian bole, 10 grains; and grind well, and mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Another method of poultice for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their place, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to reduce swelling: take fresh lamb's skin and soak it in water and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. These poultices do not promote healing, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and reducing pain.
Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of poultice for restoring broken bones and reducing swelling: take the root of the marsh mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; crush and cook in wine. If the member is inflamed, cook it with moist coriander water or water.
Another method of a stronger poultice than the previous ones, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marsh mallow roots, flax seeds, borage, melilot, and Sansevieria, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; crush and cook in water with salt, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Hippocrates writes in his book that one should put on the broken member to restore strength a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two things neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen seems to say that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another type of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and make a plaster from it.
And then loosen it a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not loosen it by hand every other day.
And if pain comes in the area, or itching, with restlessness or swelling, then hurry and loosen it and remove the poultice immediately; and take a light cloth and sponge of moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and raise the area, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on clean linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure that the hot abscess has drained;
and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin again with the subtle binding, and a little poultice, but do not tighten it as much as before; and with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the hot abscess is reduced and the redness and pain and swelling are gone, then you may need to use poultice and binding again, so begin again as you did before.Et s’il adonques ne se boit li sang, et le membre est sane, si met l’escrivein a la fine de la journee ou au commencement de la nuit;
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not remove the bandage for three, four, five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and the bone approaches the flesh beneath.
then keep the bandage tighter than before, and increase his food intake, as I said earlier; and if you see the area becoming drier than it should be, know that nourishment cannot reach it. Soak the area in warm water when you remove the bandage, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little each time.
Through this action, the nourishment will return to the limb, and reduce the damage caused by the foolishness of those who set the bone crookedly: it is a bad thing, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else other than causing weariness and doing it properly.
of various ways of breaking Many types of fractures are there, with diverse appearances, and the causes are distinct.
There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, breaking through to the sinus below the bone, as with a blow from a polearm; this type is called a "polearm fracture."
Or the sword cuts into the bone without breaking through, and this type is called a  "partial fracture;" and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if the bone is broken and protruding, reaching the membrane below the bone, or sitting on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is deep in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary".
And if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the bone is driven inward, and the place is shattered like the potter when they work on pots; then the bone is driven inside.
And this happens more to those who have soft bones at the top of their heads, like children's skulls.
and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged, as I will explain in their own sections.
And we should know all types of fractures through examination and observation, and by understanding the corrupt flesh that lies above them.
The hairline fracture is understood by uncovering the bone and rubbing it with a finger, and if there is a black fracture line.
In the treatment of fractures, be aware of adverse events from the injury, and if you see any harmful incidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsion, paralysis, fever, eyes bulging out and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then healing is not possible without a doubt.
If you do not see any frightening incidents and expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the child comes to you for the first time and it is winter, then it is necessary to cut the nail before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if it is in the summer, then you must hurry to cut the nail before the seventh day, otherwise, the tissue underneath the nail will be corrupted and the incidents that we have mentioned will occur.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the split part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the sick person, and uncover over the bone in all the ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or the abscess is heated, treat it as it should be, and it is that you fill the place with moistened cloths in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the heated abscess is soothed and you are certain there is no flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut with a narrow chisel straight ahead, and this is the form:
And then insert another chisel larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a variety of different tools, some narrow and some wide, and some pointed, and some made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, then you must drill around it, so that you may apply tools with chisels, not so deep as to penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the point, preventing the point from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one fits into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you may have chisels for every kind of skull; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
The quality for drilling around the broken bone is to place one chisel on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the chisel to another spot a little further, and continue all around; then cut into the space between the holes with incisions, and do this most skillfully and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with some instrument like tweezers or pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is fitting that you remove the membrane which is remaining on the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision knife, but it must be more blunt and sharper than the other knives;
and if it remains stuck with the small bones or any scales, then loosen them gently with instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of operating is that which Galen describes, which is much safer; and he praises it highly, and his word is final. First, you must uncover a portion of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is uncovered, place under it the tip of this lenticular incision tool, which is shaped thus:
And do not cut on one side, but the part that is curved inwards on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike it gently with a small mallet, so that you gently chip away at the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane underneath.
if it is dislocated at the bone, then the bone must be gently moved, for the bone can be moved without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, of which you should have various amounts, in order to use the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Take a large razor at first, and then a sharper one, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hairline and subtle fractures, one must apply treatment according to its nature; and this is not a simple task for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
And if the ulcer is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the wound. Then take another doubled cloth in two or three layers, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth. Do this as gently as you can so as not to irritate the ulcer, then apply another bandage above, but do not tighten it more than is necessary for it to hold;
and let it remain for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove the bandage and apply healing medications such as lily roots, and flour of vetch, and incense powder, and aristotle, and similar things. Make a powder from these ingredients and place it on the wound, then apply other medicated ointments without biting;
and be sure that the wound is clean before you apply anything else, so that no ointment or pus remains, because when pus gathers under the scalp, it corroding and piercing, causing great harm to the patient. When applying something biting, it must be followed by a soothing application above;
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that one has applied, because such a virtue, then you should take some honey and mix in three parts of rose oil and smear it on a piece of cloth, and place it on the ulcer; then treat it with various treatments until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the jawbone above are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the .ij. parties is broken, you should put your little finger or hole in the nail, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it with your thumb, until the nail returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is above the nail and the fingers cannot reach the place, you should put it in line with the top of a thick needle.
And if the break is in two parts, do the same and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then put on the head of the tent of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put another one on the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the ears.
And some restorers say that one should moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they must be moistened during the preparation of egg white, and of mill powder; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is not healed, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they put on a goose's beak instead of tents, and wind a linen cloth around it, and hold the fracture, and breathe into the wound; now do as you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, put on cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyaquilon.
And if hot abscesses do not come, put on a plaster by force, of flour of sisament, and powdered incense, confectioned with egg white, then put on light sponges, and do not tie it to the nose.
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then cut the wound, and clean out things that are foreign and foul, and bind it up, as with plasters and ointments appropriate for this purpose.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then cure it with tenting and put in splinters of linden wood, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the outside, and not broken in two, with a lump inside, then it can be detected easily.
If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, then put your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and hold it there with the other hand.
And if the break of the jaw is displaced by one-third, then you must administer an extension of one-third, so that it is made equal.
And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are bound with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place cerotum on the broken mandible, and place a double layer of cloth over it; and place a large, well-made plate, or a piece of leather of equal size, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it onto the muzzle as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the shape changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and place an ointment over it, made from powdered milk with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerotum; and place a light linen over the ointment, and if the ointments become irritated and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many are healed within three weeks.
And if hot abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it carefully to see if any pieces of bone are missing; then treat the wound with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
about the armpit: The armpit is broken in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it can be broken and dislocated with two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when there is no wound in the break, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one of them holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then place the break evenly between your fingers, so that its shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
And if you need to stretch further, place a round pillow of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; then loosen the collarbone and squeeze the pillow in your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back and place  a small pillow under his shoulder, and the ministers should push the shoulder upwards while the patient holds the pillow, so that the bone of the collarbone rises.
And then feel the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, you should split it; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any protruding fragment, you should cut one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the shoulder joint:
and resembles a spoon, and is not curved, and is as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has 2 handles, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, pack the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is to put on the bone the poultice of mill-dust and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and put a pillow under the shoulder, if you need it; then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then place a double drape on cotton padding and anoint it; then take a thin sheet three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the sheet over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and reset it from each side, and when you see that the dislocation is aligned properly, and you clearly see that the sheet is not moving over the broken bone, then release it every day, and when the ligature eases, restrain it again;
and let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder; and the fracture will lighten through the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if an evil accident does not occur, up to 20 days;
then restart the anointing, if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave him like that until he is healed; and it is healed in the most amount of time at 28 days, and less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It can happen that the shoulder is dislocated widely or narrowly in its socket without force being applied; therefore, adjust it according to the shape of the dislocation and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then apply flour from the mill with egg white, and light dressings, and place a double piece of fabric over this; then, put on a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is any swelling under the splint, use a linen dressing to pad it evenly; then tighten it firmly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its position, and check the ligature every day. Each time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side; the shoulder will be restored within 20 to 25 days. When this period is complete, remove the bandage, and be sure, for it is not a bone that can be easily put back in place.
And if a piece of bone protrudes out, and not under the heart, make an incision on top, and in the bone, and do what we have said for the dislocation of the elbow to soothe the hot abscess.
of the dislocation of the foot
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and loses flesh, and becomes thin, and vomits blood, and the bones break through the skin, and he feels it very much.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings the sides of both ribs together with your hands, and carefully tries to put it in an even manner as much as he can, so that the shape of the bone becomes as it should be; then place poultices and bandages over the fracture site with a subtle powder of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the ligature gently towards the back, and tighten it comfortably, and check every hour if it has softened, and if it has, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that comes to the site, or pain or abscess, then do so quickly, loosen it, remove the poultice, and treat what has come in various ways of treatment; then reapply the poultice, and tighten it as much as it takes to heal.
about the breaking of ribs:
You should know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the large ribs near the back, and at their ends inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and it feels very good when pressed on both sides.
And the restoration is that you put the fracture in place, as it should be. And then apply the ointment, and hold it steady with a bandage, if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is declined inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has pains in his side, and coughs up, and vomits a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
And if they have those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture out.
We do not believe that hot abscesses will heal if they have not become heated. And if he has come, then heal him.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out the infection, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is a doubt that the cupping glasses might draw out the excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
And some say that one must cover the area with wet woolen cloth in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone piercing through the tenting, and there is doubt about the patient's condition, then one should split open the rib cage over the site of the broken rib, and place a foreign object underneath to ward off the pleurisy; and then one should split the bone, gently pulling it apart, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals. And if hot abscesses appear, then place dampened cloths in rose oil over the area; and while treating the area affected by the abscess, one should also attend to the patient's side where he is lying, until he recovers.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it can bend; and also with the spine in the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that it is deadly in many cases; but if he can move his hands and feels the pain when they are pricked and pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the injury will heal if treated.
And if a similar condition occurs in the spine, and you want to know if it will heal or not, pay attention to whether his feet are swollen, and whether the symptoms in his hands also occur, and he has windiness and urination without wanting to; and when he is turned over on his stomach, there is urination without wanting to. Know that this is deadly: if no effort is made to treat it.
And if this event does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you apply an hot poultice if there is an abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels the pain until he is healed. And if any bone is exposed, cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat the wound with ointment and char until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your thumb in your left hand, and the bandage equally on both hands to your ability, then apply the plaster and bandage, if you need them; then compress, and if there is a bone exposed, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone:
Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if this happens, then there will be a little lessening in the head; and they do a long sting, and decline to the bowels, and there is pain, and piercing, and swelling where they are broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, put equal pressure on the break so that it is at its natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him. And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, and then put on a board or a log, and press the break so that it does not move; and fill in the space under the ribs so that the ribcage is equalized.Et si li estele ne peut demorer sus la briseure, et que l’estele se mueve, si covient que tu mettes le malaide sus une ciaze ou un traicti, si qu’il ne se mueve, tant que li restauration soit aparaillie.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
And if a boil appears, do not touch it until the boil is drained, and apply what we have mentioned earlier; then return to restoration, and restrain as appropriate, if there are no adverse events; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The 'adjutoires' is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods. The first method is to take a straight stick, according to this form:
And tie the two arms with two cords, and they can be pulled up, and have the patient sit on one chair; then let him bend his broken arm over his waist until he reaches the elbow, and hold a wooden curve in one hand, then pull it up against something heavy or have an assistant stretch it downward; then have the surgeon place the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is to have the patient lean forward on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other to hold under the cord and stretch each one to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten one cord under the fracture and one above it, and stretch each assistant to their part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put one cord below the elbow joint and one towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then put one light cord gently without effort, so that the fracture is equal to its place, and above the neck; then have the fracture equalized as it should be, and tighten it if no abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, then do not tighten for up to seven days, and put on a poultice of milk and rose oil until the abscesses are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is to put the poultice over the fracture, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, and tighten over the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in a resting position, unless some thing deflates it or the bone moves.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place over the fracture a splint that is larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. finger's width of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture .iij. fingers on either side; then pull on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter above the fracture, with greater force and less separation.
And if you see the setting of the splints and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the nourishment does not reach the member because it is too constricted. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then remove the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands over his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a flat cushion of wool of equal thickness, and examine every hour of the day and night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become soft; then loosen it with medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food reaches the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be healed within 40 days; and then one must remove the bandage and administer baths and ointments to heal the site. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, leave it for a day or a month.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the 'forearm', one of which is small, and is that next to the armpit; and the other is large, and is that below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large forearm may break, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small forearm is broken, its restoration and healing are easier; and when the large forearm is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when they are both broken together. If it is only the small forearm that is broken, one should gently extend it and set it straight.
And if it is the large forearm, one should pull harder; and extend the arm onto 1 cushion, and hold the armpit of the hand higher than the other hands, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross his arms over his chest, and have another cushion in front of him so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the minister's arm above the part below his hand, or to 1 side, and have another minister on the other side above. Then let the minister set the bone straight according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if none are out of place that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do it above and on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration swollen abscesses occur, glue a cloth of cerotemade from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth gently on top, until the swollen abscesses are soothed. And then remove the cloth, and apply the plaster made from the mill powder with egg white, then place the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be slightly stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 6 bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in both; and compress more on the fracture than elsewhere, decreasing gradually as I have said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor harsh; and let the thread with which it is bound be made from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And re-bandage the limb and the fracture after a few days. And if any bad incident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be tightly bound to rest. And then restart the compression, and if the bandages are softened and the bone displaced, and similar things happen, then stop.
And if one takes a bath so that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too constricted, then one should loosen it a little and leave it for some days, until the nourishment flows, and then tighten it again.
And if none of these things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then leave it loose for 20 days or until the healing is complete; then he may wash his hands and neck, and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture will be healed in 30-35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and to our fingers there are few fractures, and only sprains come but many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary that the patient cross his arms and sit upright in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones, and puts them equal to each other, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the palm of the hand, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to squeeze his broken palm; then stretch it with a long cloth, and the cast of wax should be as big as the palm of the hand, and he squeezes it, as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you should put a cast on top and another one underneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, adjust it as needed and then straighten it; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index finger or another, adjust it and bind it with the neighboring healthy finger; or you can bind them all together, moving as needed, or put a cast on top of the finger, as in the case of the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any that arise, as I have said.
of a broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when they turn forward and backward; and its restoration is such that one ties a cord above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then they both stretch their cords equally to their sides; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one cord should go towards the buttock, and the other cord below the fracture. And likewise, if it is close to the knee, then the cord should go below the knee, and the extension should be downward; then the healers put the bone equal to their two hands, as much as it is according to its natural figure, and then they put on the poultice and the bandage, if no abscesses come from it.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this way. You should wrap the fracture with a hard bandage folded in half, and keep it in place; then return the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then go back up the leg and around the thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put another splint on the bone of the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to ensure the binding is even, then tie three or four turns firmly over the fracture; as you go higher above the fracture, loosen the binding; then feel the two threads you inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back under to the end of the thread, so that you reach the foot; tighten it so that it does not move out of place, then leave it like that so that no abscess or swelling or anything else comes.
And if something happens there, then loosen it and address what is happening, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned out; and the wound is treated as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way with splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, this treatment does not help the patient at all.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
of the joint of the knee
Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or a hole, and it happens to all wounds, and without wounds, and this is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is that one puts something equal to what is broken in its place, as long as it can be put together; then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each accident as it needs, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
You should know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, one of which is properly called the "mustelz", and the other is called the "foscile"; and all injuries occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Therefore administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be lesser and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, then take two wooden splints that reach from the knee to just below the break on either side of the leg; then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg should not be able to decline to the right or left, and so is well; and some administer a block under the leg that reaches from the foot up to the knee, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the break where there is injury; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
from the break of the bones in the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but at times there is a break in the bones of the foot and the two bones of the little toe, and there are various dispositions.
And if it happens that the bones of the leg are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground as if he were going to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their proper place; then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the leg's belly, then wrap it with cloth and other things as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken toe, according to its length, and let it be a little wider; then place under the foot that small wooden board I mentioned before, and tighten it in place. And if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
And you should not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each case as it deserves.
of the fracture of the bone of the shoulder
When the bone of a woman's shoulder is broken, have her sit up straight and lean forward toward her back, and hold her from behind. Then fill the wound with cotton and insert a stone as large as an egg into it; then help the woman stand up little by little, and the cotton will come out with the stone when she stands, and the bone will return to its place with the stone. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days or until it is healed. Then the fracture will be repaired. Take a lamb's bladder, attach a straw to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the straw until it is inflated inside the wound; the bone will return to its place. Fill it with cotton again and leave it like that for several days until it heals.
And when the bone of the shoulder of a man or a woman is broken, it can be restored as we have said for the bone of the hip; these fractures are not hidden from those who practice and study this art, and they should listen to my book, because I will explain different methods for their restoration. Listen, therefore.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thighbone or shoulderbone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then continue to treat the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no hot abscesses come.
And if painful abscesses arise, let healing await the ninth day, until the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil outcome.
And if the broken bone is visible underneath the uncovered chest, you should gently put it back into place with your hands, with slight extension.
And if extension does not work to put it back into place by hand, then reset it using this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to hold it with a grip of three or four fingers, depending on what he requires in each case of broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure when you work on the limb, and tapered at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a «palanch», because the curved head of the bone should be placed under the visible part of the bone; and press it down once, as far as it will go, and make it even against the other bone. And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut into the head of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability; then scrape away what is stuck in the bone of harshness and fine shavings.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then moisten a cloth with black wine vinegar, and apply it to the wound if there is any; do not put any ointment or other medicine on the wound that might cause swelling and corruption; then administer leeches after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the bandage around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. Many fools have done this and caused their patients great harm, even death, or have caused corruption; and let the pressure be lighter on dislocated joints than other broken bones.
And if the wound is serious or large, and you doubt that harm might come from it, as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then do not apply leeches; but wrap around the wound, instead of leeches, hard bandages, and tie them tightly. And when you see after a day or two that pus has formed at the wound, remove what you put on over the wine, and apply healing ointment to wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon or similar.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and closed up.
And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring moves easily downward.
And if they persist for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption appears, then it must be treated according to what he says in the chapter earlier on. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as with the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not touch it, because many die from this, but leave it until it calluses over; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come over the soudure
Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there remains an unsightly appearance to the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the pus is fresh: apply astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, either one or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or garlic; and place them on the wound in poultices, and hold it firmly, and do not remove for several days; then loosen it, and start another, until the inflammation is reduced; or apply a well-prepared plaster of pitch, for the nature of pitch is to remove all swelling from the limbs; if the inflammation has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, scrape off the top, and reveal the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon, so that it is removed, and healed until it is cured.
When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and slender, there are many causes: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weakened.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep the body relaxed so that blood multiplies in him; and administer bath to him, and give him joy and rest; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and often wash with tepid water until the attraction goes into the limb; and return to its natural shape.
[until the limb is] straight after health
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm and even death may come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, they should be washed with warm water, or soft herbs such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften, and you make a softening plaster, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and cook it with tallow of calf's skin or oil of sisament, and make a plaster to spread over it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse manure, and similar medicines that soften.
And sometimes the dislocation is opened by constantly rubbing it with moist hands for a long time, and movement is given to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is awakened and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut to the bone with a subtle incision; and put cotton and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
And if dislocation comes to anyone, then one must immediately reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the part swells and sometimes they reset it with needles in place; therefore one should not move it until the swelling has subsided, as many times this brings about a spasm and other pains.
However, when this happens, let the patient bleed and then let it be, until the abscesses are drained; then bathe the member with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
of the mandibles
Then the jaws are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little pulled out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in, nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various dispositions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed, in order to apply pressure evenly. And instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws from all sides.
And watch her until she returns to her place.
And if the dislocation is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, then use hot water and oil, until you reset it gently; do not try to force it back into place, as we have said.
And when they are reset in alignment, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with soft bandages moistened in cerate made from rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft strings.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor try to stretch himself, but take light food, until the pains are relieved, and let the mandibles be bound together.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the mandible is well tied and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence. And many die from it within eight days.
from the fork
The armpit cannot be dislocated within its continuance, neither on the inside nor outside; and it has been dislocated sometimes by force, and it is well felt when this happens.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the armpit firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply the ointment and bind it up tightly.
And the joint of the shoulder near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is forced and does dislocate, then it must be reset to its place as we have said. Then apply the ointment, bind it up tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;
And the joint of the shoulder near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is forced and does dislocate, then it must be reset to its place as we have said. Then apply the ointment, bind it up tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed. And likewise, the head of the spine is brought back into place when it is dislocated from its position.
of shoulder dislocation
You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the axilla below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it is dislocated above, and this rarely happens.
It does not dislocate at the back of the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; it often dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who are thin; but in those who are sturdy, it dislocates with force, and goes back in with force.
And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
And a dislocation is known when it is low towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them. And you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move any movements;and tu troveras li membres desous plus lons que les sussus; et il n’est pas de bon semblant.
And also, if it is dislocated on top, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly in the touch.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and this type of dislocation does not heal on its own when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the sick hand up, then place your knees under the shoulder, and pull the joint forcefully upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back down; this should be done quickly.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and they should be anointed with a soothing and softening ointment, such as a decoction of aniseed, fenugreek, and sweet violet in water, and they should be massaged.
Then the sick person should be laid on their back, and a layer of equal wool, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder joint, then the assistant places their heel on the sto, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the hand of the sick person;
and other ministers dye the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will return right away, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
and you should have present a man who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the armpit, and press his shoulder underneath the elbow of the patient, and lift up the elbow so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return right away.
And they reset it also in another way: and one sticks a long peg into the ground, whose head is as wide as a penny, and neither too big nor too small; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then the hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
And if it does not return despite all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, with a pointed tip to easily enter the joint, according to this shape:
Then tie it onto the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not burn the patient; then place it under the joint of the patient. Extend his arm along the length of the staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the tip of the hand; then place the arm on a shield four fingers wide, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you must put under the joint a sphere of wool equal in size, then apply the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, frankincense, and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let his hand remain thus.
And one must eat little while the limbs are being comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauteries at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers them in another way; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou haut et les costes, si font par estendement, et li cauteres on li met a l’entour des costes sus la piere, car li nerfs sont tenduz sus la piere sus les costes, et li membres sont tenduz ou est la dislocation.
And if after healing there is aching in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse, then the patient should be bled many times until that ache is alleviated and returns to its former state.
of dislocation of the neck
You should know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with the fingers, and it goes back with the fingers; and when it is dislocated from all sides, especially from the front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you should reset it as soon as any abscesses appear, for if the abscesses appear, it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset all over, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and death may result.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset you should extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and its hands should press according to the elbow all around, forward and backward, and push at the joint of its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and pushes from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers stretch it, so that he does not move at all with the extension; then turn the arm from each side after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
and when he examines the joint in his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then bend it fully until it returns.
and when it is back in place, he should apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it tightly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not fitting well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is firmly in place, then loosen it.
And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and massage him gently, and press until he is relieved; you should put a fat sheep's tongue on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and do this 2 or 3 times until he is healed; and if you see, put warm moist cow dung with butter on it, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, as long as the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
And the method of putting it back into place is that you put the hand of the patient on a table, and extend the fingers, and look at it to make sure it is straight, then press it so that it returns to its natural state.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right place; then put the patient's back to his hand on a table, extending and bending it. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's back to his hand on the table, and the examiner should put his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it goes back now, that's good.
If not, then strain it with soothing plasters, warm abscesses, and leave it without re-enclosing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted;
and does the patient no harm as long as the hand is weak, and cannot squeeze anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other cure except to squeeze with a cautery near the wound, and by chance nothing else helps.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then squeeze it and leave it for five days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then moisten it with warm water and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times, they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
Then pull the fingers, and put the dislocation back in place as far as it will go. Then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
Let it be for two days, and then put it back in place the next day. And don't bind it as we have said, but loosen it at night, and move it during the day, and bind it again at night. Do this often until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
from the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade from the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this injury.
And the signs are that the dislocated joints cannot be moved voluntarily, nor can they hold anything, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, or both hips, or one arm, or the other.
And often the shoulder blade dislocates in four places; that which dislocates at the back is called "dislocation of the scapula":
the treatment if you find out that the joint dislocation occurred during childhood: then there is no treatment or healing from it at all.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with great words, where there is not much benefit at all;
but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the dislocation that comes at the front foot, there is no healing or health;
and also that which comes directly from both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which comes properly from the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and has a strap under him, so that he does not bend;
then insert a brand in the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the joints of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two servants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and are well closed, the firebrand as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board of 3 yards long, and lay it under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and place the end of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and have the surgeon press his feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to place; and if you see that it is turning the wrong way, do it to the side that turns towards the hand.
And you should insert 2 firebrands at the head of the patient's arm, and 2 more towards his feet, with a palm width of space between each firebrand, both above and below.
and in each log there is a hole, through which the wire runs, and the logs are firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; between each pair of logs there is a turning log, around which the wire turns, and between each pair of turning logs there are two small logs the length of a palm, for turning the wire;
then tie the wire that is between the logs at the head end to the turning log, and the other wire at the foot end to the other turning log, and each of the assistants turns his wire all the way along the line, and the master straightens the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a board three inches wide, which covers the hunch and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a band, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle soothing until he is healed.Et quant il sont sanez, si remue l’espine et les membres de çouque costé, et li malaide est guaris.
And when they are healed, move the spine and limbs from side to side, and the patient is cured. And if anything comes at the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one believes it to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, because of which one must not have any presumption: by chance it could bring about death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only result in dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more within, and slightly dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee opens more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over the fire; and the area is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of those who have a discharge are contrary to those mentioned earlier.
And the signs of those who have it in front are that their leg is well according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they go, they pass over the heel.
And the signs of those who have it behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is soft, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are as follows: examine whether the dislocation is recent or old, and if it persists according to its nature, there should be no concern; and no presumptuousness should be shown.
And for the one in which the dislocation is fresh and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, stretching it inward and outward, moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place and require no further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a strong binding, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it to the knee; and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands underneath his heels, then the wrist of a strong cord is tied around the thigh; and another ties the head with a strong cord;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as much as the patient is raised off the ground at one time, and remains pendant.
This method of extension is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, however, one should apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on their healthy side, then place the ligament over the root of the thigh, and over the joint underneath the armpit; then extend the ligament upwards towards the armpit and towards the arm.
Then have another assistant grasp his arms and squeeze the large joint of the dislocated thigh and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong leather thong around their heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with his feet two arms' length above the ground; then command a minister to grip the head of the thigh firmly, and have another minister hanging with the patient, who grips the thigh firmly, for the joint will return immediately.
And when the dislocation is corrected, let the patient lie as we have said for those with gout, and tighten one ligature on the affected leg properly, and another on the foot as well;
then put two embers, one at the head and another at the foot, and insert an ember between the thighs on the affected side; and has moist bandages wrapped around it so that it does not hurt the patient, then he extends each limb towards him, and the assistant holds the dislocated joint steady in his hand.
If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put the patient on a table and press it as we have said in the case of the shoulder, and lay the patient on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant should put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it downward towards the knee.Et s’il ne veut aler, si covient le lever sus li pels de la gamba malaide, et li mires mette sa main en l’angre malaide, et presse ensi com nos avons dit; car il doit aler ou il nule point aler.
And if the dislocation is in the back, one should not extend the affected limb downward or lift it up off the ground, but it should be treated as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips.Et s’il ne veut aler, si covient le lever sus li pels de la gamba malaide, et li mires mette sa main en l’angre malaide, et presse ensi com nos avons dit; car il doit aler ou il nule point aler. and it shall be upon his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint on the table;
and it will be at rest when the patient extends his legs, and they will be straightened; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and tie it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are straight, then bind it again as before and leave it for 3 days; then loosen the bandage and make him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of dislocation of the knee
There are three ways that the knee can be dislocated: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it cannot be dislocated in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms and pull it gently between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee; and another minister extends his foot while you pull, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily.
and apply the plaster on top, and tie the leg to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and the patient must not walk, until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not straight, strong extension is administered as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
Heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, within and without.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it was dislocated:
the movements should be easy, and when he is only stretched out with his hands it should be slightly extended.
And when he is healed from everything, you should have the patient sit upright and hold his leg firmly with .i. minister above the ankle;
then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand .ij. times, then extend it upwards, and bend the foot upwards nicely;
and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, that is good; if not, then restart the operation, for it will come back.
and if he cannot come back like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wrap a cloth around it, so that he does not kick the stake;
then have one assistant hold his thigh, and another assistant stretch out the foot with their hands or with a cord, so that it lies on the collar of the foot; then each assistant stretches equally, and the stake is driven further between the patient's thighs to hold him in place when he is stretched;
then have the patient hold the dislocated joint in his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place gradually.
And when it is in place, then apply the plaster and gauze, and tighten it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, taking care not to press too hard on the nerves behind the ankle.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, tighten it again. Then remove it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should be able to walk within four days. And if he walks before that time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
And if a hot abscess comes, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the armpits
When the arms are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and that is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in the lower back near the feet, you should have the patient lie on their back on a flat surface or a table, completely straight, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place underneath the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then stretch it out strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, soothe the hot abscess, and leave the disease in God's hand if you don't see hope for health. and when you see hope, then put the limb back into place so that the hot abscesses heal.
and when the limb is in place, then administer hot abscess-soothing things and treat the wound as needed with drying ointments;
and if there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones and do what we have said about simple diseases;
and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will benefit you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and your body. Amen.
