O ye, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine as a whole, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, "surgery."
And because the work of the hands is well-treated in our region and is strange to all, it is a perilous science and worthy, and there is no delay from the forces except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And because of this, error and vanity have come, and the intentions are closed and the science is separated.
Or I think that I will bring it back to life together with the order of this healer according to the way of exposure and statement and abbreviation; and will come together with the shapes of the tools of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the statement and preparation of it, just as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is extended. And he who deals with it must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the shape and connection of bones and nerves and veins and the number of organs, and the movement and flowing together and rest of joints, and the place of their origin.
And because, as Hippocrates says, nothing is with nothing and everything is with everything; and especially in the art of hands.
We say to you in the introit of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things before spoken of, let him guard himself lest he fall into error and harm men; so that I have often wanted many of those who meddle in this science and who abandon themselves to science and experience.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofula or throat of a woman, and cut the arteries in the throat; so that so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who fought with an axe against a man of age, and the axe was big; so he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
And I have also seen him called to draw out a lance, and I saw the disposition of the sick person and the greatness of the lance; and if he had drawn it out, he would certainly have died.
And here is the first sentence of the text:
And here is the translation of the first sentence:
However, all the ways in which this corruption occurs are confirmed by injury to the member, and it cannot be healed; and this corruption does not cease to spread through the member until the members are completely lost.
And here is the first sentence of the text:
For charnel, when it is purulent with melancholy humor, it should only be touched by iron if it is in the right place where one can completely remove what is corrupt.
And for this reason, a skilled craftsman should know that the work of hands is divided into 2.1 divisions: namely, where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
For thus you should guard yourself, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better path so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and reject those weapons from whom you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of bad illnesses, lest you be called a fool."
I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the order of the body parts; as well as shapes of instruments, tools for cauterization, and everything else necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about tailoring and sewing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; as well as the ordering and shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered of the surgeon to measure only as much flesh, and of the form of the instrument.
Thus, we remember the work; it is necessary for me to give the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its responses are hidden. Many wise men have spoken about this, and they agree with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the long.
I say that fire is an aid to all complexions in which there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot and dry matter, and cold and dry matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some thought it good and said that cautery is great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is of no account to disease which comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by hot disease through heat, nor through dryness; and he who said that cautery does great help to hot and dry disease which comes in courses to men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found none by experiment.
And all ways, do not interfere with it but those who have tried it and know by long use the fire cautery, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and the space of ten; we have no fear of other complexions, indeed, except for cold and moist diseases. And all things agree together and accord with the cautery.
And know, children, that fire cautery agrees together and is of greater benefit than medicinal cautery.
For fire is simple, and comes not forward but to the limb which is cooked, and does no harm to another limb by name.
The burning remedies come from one member to another by way of withdrawal, and bring sickness of great cure to the member; and perhaps they cause the disease.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this, unless there is an excess.
And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have given to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I beg you to excuse me for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should disclose the secret of fire which is answered elsewhere, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher states in proving; and so receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at what times, and they were to be prayed for.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for because the harmful consequences that arise from aid by cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot be waited for the time that greater harm does not come to the limb.
And I do not think ever, son, as they do so; for with the illness that is healed by cauterization does not have a return; and it serves thus; but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the appearance, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and nobility.
And it is possible that the illness will not come according to the appearance of the disease and its place and virtue; and are assembled in it the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not administered cauterization at the place where there is little excess and moisture, so as cauterization for the pain, and the similar things, and the pain does not return; but it does come little.
And many people do not understand because the cauterizes are called the derriers of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that the cauterizes are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine for whatever reason when we administer ways to heal in no disease and they are not worth it, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth something. Therefore, know well that the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine, not at all according to the intention of the foolish men.
The ancient men said that the cauterizes made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, and they only stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; they also said that the heat of a cauterize does not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have proven it, and I have found that in some people it does; and the cauterizes of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, as they said.
And anyway, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you are not burned when it is held to your skin, and it soon cools down; and if it is heated too much, it will turn black on the fire, and so there is enough prevention.
And so we use our fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
For I have ordered this chapter about the lochia until it is finished, so that the way may be easier to find.
the olive oil cautery
The olive oil cautery is good for the brain, and in it I have two uses: one is because of a disease called "soda," and the other is because of various humors that descend from the head to the hair, and for many dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis and soda and apoplexie and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the disease should be expelled by a soluable medicine, speaking about the third day, according to what the virtues and the freshness and the habit of the patient can bear; and then do the same with the head of the patient.
And then place the cross between your hands, and put his hands on your chest; after that, place the root of your thumb on the root of his index finger; and as soon as it comes to you, if it bleeds, heat the cautery that is called 'oliver', from which this form is:
And place it on the ink sign, and do it descending and extracting your hand little by little in turning back; then release your hand completely, and reward the leech where you see the bone 1 small; and if you don't see it, then restart the cautery as soon as you see the bone as I told you; after that, take 1 little bit of leech, and put it in wet cotton, and put it on the ink, and let it stay for 3 days; after that, put it on wet wool; and leave it until it is heated; then cure the wound with an ointment called 'tetrarch', until it is healed.
And say the ancient one that the longer the wound stays open, the more it expels; and for this reason if you help it.
And none of these said that one must leave the cauterization so much that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And the other said that one must leave the cauterization so much higher up, and pierce it so hard that women put in their breasts to let the humors go out; and one must leave the wound open a long time; after which one must cure and sew.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except where there is doubt and fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; because the head, by nature, is weakened by continuous solutions, as we witness in other members; and even more so when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems to me to be safer and less harsh for me, and I use that one where possible to assemble salvation.
of the old pain of the head
When in all parts of the head come chronic pains, and endure long, then must use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery that we have above said, and it does not help.
Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize it quickly as we have said above.
After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and make the fire cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and that is the place where one sets the leech; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it comes that the cauterizations of the horns are more delicate than those by which one cauterizes the soft part of the head, and this is the form:
For the fire cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one side of the head and spreads up to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed with medicinal poisons, and other cures are made as I said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps: then make the cauterization according to these two ways, that is to say, with medicine and fire.
When the medicine for acute pain is made from an almond, and the peel and core are removed and boiled in water for two chaps, and then the water is poured over the skin; and when it has dried, put cotton in it until it is soft.
After the medicine has cured, until it is well; and if you wish, do as much of the treatment with burning medicines that I have written or treated with fire.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
And let it be called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. poc of corbeure, and in the middle to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little gently, until the half of the keur's flesh is burned; and let go your hand that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs an abundance of blood.
For the headache:
For the headache:When you treat a headache as we have said above in the divisions of illnesses, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization in front does not hurt at all, then it is right that you heat the fire which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus write on the painful place a line half as long as the finger, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cover the artery and come no closer; and guard against the jaw that moves when you yawn, and let there be no rustling or twitching of the muscles except by accident, and guard against the pain of the blood vessels when they are covered, which is a great fear and more to him who does not know it, and who is a scholar and has tried it; and leave the work in half a line.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals. And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or the extract of blood vessels with the cautery which has 1/4th of a tool; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied the solutions and other cures which we have said in the chapter on the division of the head, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which the form is:
After having heated the tip of this cautery, which is called "poins", of which the form is:
of the mouth torture
torture that must be cured by fire is only effective for those that move from pus, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use fire on similar things that come from scabs and lice.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves from pus, scabs, and lice in the throat and gargling, and it is worth, then you should make three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further back on the temple, and the third at the meeting of the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part, and let it burn half of the time; and this is the form of the cautery:
And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little thicker; after curing the area as I said before, until it is healthy.
iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et i. emmi le chief, et i. ou leu qui est apelez "vasselz" si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l'estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.
As for the treatment of litargy,
For the treatment of litargy,
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, he makes 1.iii. cauterises removing the hair from the head down to the neck, and there is space between each cauterise of 1.ii. two big ones; and treat as before, and if it stings, and the patient suffers, then make 1. cauterise in the middle; and if necessary, 1.iii. others on the 2.ii. cornes, and treat him until he is well; and let the cauterises which are called "olive", be as before.
of the cold of the cold
of epilepsy
of epilepsy
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the fire, he makes gargling and chewing with bones of meat; after that he places the head in the middle, and he does .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, he does cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the neck, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive according to the way I have said.
If the patient is a child, he does a subtle cautery according to this method:
When, due to melancholy, there are excesses or corrupt moisture and thick pus, then he does partial cauterization as we have said to him who has paralysis:
And if, due to melancholy, there is a decline in excesses toward melancholy, and the patient's neck is moist, then he does a drinking thing so that the brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
If you see fit to cauterize him by making several points all around the cautery. This way of cauterizing moistens the skull evenly; and then put cotton soaked in butter and in grease of goose on it.
of the eyes When awoke comes first as eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient thing purifying the head, and the ward of all moisture, and he makes sweat or bath several times on hunger.
After he has given a command to raise his head, and has caused fire cautery to be made on his head, and has made .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples where it is dislocated from the jaw, all together, or in .i. where it is dislocated, it is in .i.; and cover all the cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are removed from the chin, let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood coming out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop him by doing what you can.
And I will teach you how to stop the blood flowing in extraction of the arteries and in incising the cautery; and never make a cauterization or hurt behind the 2 bones of the neck.
the two tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delege the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is cold superfluities of phlegm, therefore he does the cautery that I said at the beginning of the jaw descending to the eyes: 1. cauterize the head, and 2. cauterizes on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizes where he has hurt from the 2 bones; and if it is needed more, if the cauterizing bleeds well on the skin at all small cauterize.
The tears run down inside the eyes.
When you have done this medicine as we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then do three times a day three cups of drink for illness; after he raises his head, and makes a fire at the middle of the olive cauldron; and does three fires on the three nails, a little oil the hair; and take care of the vein that you do not cover. This is the form of the fire:
When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then the fire of this cauldron that is called "olive": from this is the form:
And if you see so many cauterizes on the seven types of wounds as the scalpel is long; and do not let go of the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
The hair that points to the oil No time has passed that the hair of the oils is converted to the parched, and grasps the oil, and it does on cauterizes according to 1.i ways: namely of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cet chapitre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
When they are born and are long and even, then put the patient in your bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the fuel of mirth, and let it be the beginning of the sign by which the hairs are pricked; then put cotton wet with glue and muskroot made into an oil on the fire, and heat the cautery by which this form is made:
After cauterizing on the figure you have signed little by little several times so that the scar is burned in place; and the sign of the work's health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then let your hand rest, and leave it thus .iij. days, then put cotton wet with butter as long as it is warm; after the wound has healed as much as it can.
And then when these come out, and the paper is softened then begin again the fire on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs have fallen, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the hair oil.
The medicinal fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the mirth leaf; then take of French soap and of hot water, of each one a ¼, and grind them well together; and do it promptly, so that if it doesn't cool down, then spread on the shape you have made like the mirth leaf, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the illness is in 1 oil only, then operate in 1, and also in both; and put cotton wet with glue and muskroot made into an oil on the fire; and heat the cautery by which this form is made: when the patient feels the medicine's burning, press 1 time and half and damp all times as the patient feels the medicine's burning, for he also feels burning like fire. Once you have done this for a long time, take the medicine to your chest. Once the mordication has passed, raise the arm and keep it raised as if it were lifted by a fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are even, and your nails are cut; and then put cotton wetted with oil over the wound for as long as the burn itches, after which heal the wound that is called "diane" and others, until it heals.
And if you must take care of your wound with great care so that it does not break out with the medicine on the hair. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair grows in oil, then start the medicine again on the spot that is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before; after healing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the powder made from mirabelle:
And know that the hair of men is different in length and thickness, and according to what you are constrained; and do not give the right answer to anyone whose study of this craft it is.
On the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his/her head in your lap; and hold the hair at the base with a damp cloth or juice of persimmon on oil; then heat the cautery which is sharp: and hold it to the head like a feather, together so that the tip is near the scalp; if you see, so point it from one side to the other, and if you don't see, so hold it like a tent; but however, that which is held over the head will move for your benefit.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, so overture it, and treat the bowels; after put a sharp cautery on it, and hold your hand over the cautery with oil, that your hand does not go mad; and put the cautery in oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin cauterizing again, and otherwise as you need, and leave it .iii. days; after i put on cotton wet in oil, and cure for the healing of the wound dry as long as it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass that it is healthy, then put on medicine corrosive to water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what came out in his chapter.
And I have a method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancient ones spoke of. Understand a fistula, and pierce the place; after put in the piercing 1. a thin metal of which this is the shape: and I make it in the quantity of 1.Z. of molten; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted drop does not run to its oil; and it is good that you put on cotton wet in alcohol or wine: the drop then strikes the place of the fistula, and heals with a maravillous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a piercing blow to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the nose according to what came out in his chapter.
of the sores on the lips Mouth times have creases on the lips that are called "hair", and most often on the lips of children.
When you treat these sores as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
And place it directly into the sores until it burns; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When abscess comes to the root of the throat or to the palate or to the roots of the teeth, after having been rotten and swollen and has become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, it does no good: then you should have 1.i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having sewed up or pierced the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes into the source of the water, and behind it; and do so once or twice., after having cured as we have said in the cures, as long as it is healthy; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you should uncover the site and remove the corrumpted bone according to what you will find in his chapister.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after heating the cautery so that its form will come out as described hereafter, then put a ring on the tooth; and insert the cautery quickly into the tooth root, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the tooth root; then remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your wish; after filling the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keeping it for an hour and washing it thoroughly.
And so the following is the translation of that text:
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
For when the pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold in the mouth, and the remedies of medicine are useless, then it is necessary to cauterize according to the following four ways: and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
And the following is the translation of that text:
The fire cautery all together if it is such that you squeeze a tooth of iron or of gold, and make it gross so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; then heat the cauterizer, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterize cools; do this often, for the pain will be great that very day or the next. And it is convenient that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then suck hard; and here is the shape of the cautery:
For when the scrofula is of cold and wet sweat, and does not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizer that comes after this, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to come out at the cautery of the other side; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or 1.3 times is done, whatever the size of the abscess is, and leave it ensi 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil in butter on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with ointments and Bandages until it is well.
When the moisture conquers the channels in which they flow, and even more so when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first voided by medicinal solvents; then do cauterization at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come all the way to the throat, and dare not cur it, but just a little. Then I will do another cautery at the joint of the neck with the chief of the spine, and let these cauteries be called "clavicles" from which we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said above until it is healthy.
for the toast When all and the disease of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills but is an old illness, then he should do iij. cauterices in the forelegs on the lungs; and another cautery emmi the pis between iij. mameles; and let these cauteries be called "clavicles" according to the form that is before said.
And if you see, do cauterization by piercing all the cauterization that is called "poins" from which the form is as described in the disease of the ears; and let these points up to .iii. or until the ear. After cure the place according to what is before said, and let the cauterizations be made to iij. rains according to this form:
And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you are doing it.ii. at home.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, speak kindly to the patient about his back and ribs; then take hold of the knuckle with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery for .iij. nails; here is the form:
and cauterize him as long as he pierces up to the rib, and comes together with the figure of cautery 2.3 cauterizes; and for this one is made a cauterization with the cautery which has 1.3 nerves, because the figure of cauterization are placed cauterizes; and are the nerved according to the subtility of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery which has 1.3 nerves:
And never put on this 1.6 nerve because there are 8 cauterizes.
After you have put on the cautery, grind with it; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well fixed.
And if it is dislocated on top, pour liquid over it; then make cauterize on the thick of the cautery clavile, or out of cauterizes in striking. For the jointure is closed, and is bone the moisture and is healed the maladies.
To treat a cough
To treat a cough, they used to say to make a tincture of aristo root, and in this way: take an aristo root that is long, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your two fingers; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize.i. cauterize between the chest and the neck, andii. small cauterizations a little down on the part that is under the beard; andii. small cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting backwards a little; and i. cauterize the breast, and i. another one on the stomach, andi. between the two shoulders, and ii. more between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand tightly, but open it widely as if smelling.
And no ancient one said that any man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and scrapes and places it between the ribs, until it comes to the aposteme; and he jumps at the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
Here is the translation of the text:
"From these three methods, you should do all three types of cauterization, according to the length and shape of the mouse's cauterization, as we have described above. Do not rush with your hand over all the cauterization, and let the patient rest on his back;"
"And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery where the cut of the disease begins on the left side, and raise it according to the length of the body, and the cauterization is according to the width of the body."
"After the two nails are heated, leave them red-hot until the other side is perceived, and then quickly apply the cautery, and thus you will have three. After the cure, when it has been heated for a long time, and this is enough to complete the other cure that we mentioned above."
from dropsy
from dropsy
After leaving the fire cauterization alone for a long time, do not continue with the cure for the disease after the cauterization; and the healing would hasten, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have in front to describe it; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described ahead.
of the swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in a person with gout, and they are yellow in color, then you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and gently remove your hand from the cautery without turning it off. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow liquid burst forth, and instead perform the cauterization according to this form:
After making the cautery on .ij. legs in each leg at the tip of the fingernail; and let the cautery be long, one from the ankle in front and the other behind, while keeping the leg still; and leave the cauterization for a long time without washing it off, lest the yellow liquid come out; then cure the others as we have said.
from the foot
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach are lost, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, then do I.i. a great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken here before or cautery of the stomach, with cautery circulated; and I.iiij. cauteries inside the navel gently to all I.i. cautery clavicle, and II.ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then do I.i. cautery on the wrist, and I.i. cautery on each finger, and II.ij. small cauteries on the stomach, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrumptous humors, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then do I.iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and I.i. cautery of the buttocks. ij. dois;
and if you think his stomach is cool, and the meat doesn't cook, and you see the face swell, then on i . f . a great cautery over the stomach, as it has been said before, and another over the liver, and i . another over the mice to all the cauterization nailed; and let the cautery overt long time. After cure the place until it is healthy.
of the charnality which is called "thelul"
When you cope to the thul, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on the thul; and leave so much your hand that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, of which it is without doubt; do this once or two times, and if there is a lot of thul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of profitable oignons until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
of a bad wound
When the patient cannot bear a wound or incision, we will tell you in due course, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When there comes a fistula and it is increased and pours putrid moisture, if you provide a tentative remedy of all subtlety, and remember that you know how much it is effective. After heating the cautery which seems sharp, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that the attempt has entered, and restart the cautery as long as those corrupt and corrupted parts are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of the required; and keep away from the nerves that are in them, and do not do this but in a charnel-house, and think that it is not persistent; after curing the part until it is sound, and if the parts are dried up, you will know that the part is completely cured; and if the parts have not been dried up, you will know that the part has been three times burned, and that the bone at the root is corrupt; and so as one of these which we will tell you in due course.
from the disease of the kidneys When pain in the kidneys comes with fierce wind, and does not take a woman's form, then you must give a cautery to the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery which we have just mentioned; and if we give the cautery in the middle, there will be 2 cauterizations in line, and it will be more useful help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs grow on the penis, and .i. to the right and .i. to the left, and each cautery as long as a finger; and make a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let the cauteries be nailed according to the shape described above.
of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, so that it does not allow for conception, and the flowers are腐したand their termsdelayed; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to make 11 cauteresthroughout the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and 11 cauteresthoughout the back; and let the cauteries be nailed, as we have said.
from the hip
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be soft, so that you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at i.i. a circular cautery, and sign in front of the joint inside the circle as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and if so, cauterize like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present, make i.i.i. large olive cauterizations, and let the cauterization be complete as all the others; and heal it until it is healthy.
from the hip pain When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with pills made from bad bile, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the manner of the cautery is according to .iij. ways: namely together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to much ways, of which one is this: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. cauteries triangular according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and between each cautery there is the thickness of a thumb, and it is olive; never does one make cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for by doing so one has .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip: but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the joint be burned.
And this is the manner that is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach until the thigh or leg: and if it comes only to the thigh and leg, you do  .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and 1. cautery above the ankle 2. three, at the left part a little; and let the cauterizes be scissor-like, and let the thickness of the joint burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the instep, you do the cautery where he feels the pain  .iij. points or  .iiij. at the cautery called "points".
And if your craft is to treat this, do it more; and if the pain is felt in the groin toward the thigh, make a cautery with a knife-like or circular scalpel, and give yourself good care for all your cauterizations so that you do not let go of them even a little bit while burning the hair and large arteries, and causing greater harm and contraction to the sick person.
And I have seen many who have made cauterization on the foot of the leg and left it so that the whole leg was raised, and the toes too, and it was pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, make cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, from which it is this way, make a piece of iron and be at the top also thick as one finger of a hand or one less, and be between the intertraches and also on the one intertraches jusc' to the other d'espace the quantity of a nut of piece; and let the intertraches be above of .ij. parts, and also like noez, and there are .i. pieces of good iron; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and gnat, and then put it on the box of the sick ankle, and turn it on the right side of the chest; and make cauterization one time 1 cauterization and leave 1ij jors; and then make plaster with grease, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of his burning, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery, which he can bear, and where he afflicts himself.
of the pain of the two
When pain comes to the back, or by bending over, or from impact, or from excessive evaporation, or by the appearance of expanding cold matter; no remedy is suited to these except that which is due to the infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting that the patient be voided of foul pills or other things; let him take a suppuration on his back, where the pain is, three lines apart, and in each line let there be as many caustics as the patient can bear; and make the cautery according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, take 2 or 3 caustic
Maitre doctor, mays de peine pour ces jeunes enfants qui naissent avec une tete plate et qui ne peuvent pas se tenir debout sans aide; nous voyons des marques de leur peine dans leur dos, et c'est pourquoi ils ont l'air maladroit quand ils marchent.
Master doctor, may God be with you as you treat these young children who are born with a flat head and cannot stand without support; we see the signs of their suffering in their backs, and that is why they look awkward when they walk. If you see him, treat him according to this form.
So that the fire cautery is applied evenly to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery.ij or iij lines apart, and let the points be close together. After treating it as we have described, guard against applying cautery to the marrow where there is nerve tissue.
of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people call "podagre" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery olive according to this form:
When it is necessary to hold on the face of the foot, then do a fire cautery on all the cauterization that is claimed "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then do a cautery on each knee with .iiij. cauterizations or all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firm except when the fire of the wound is burned.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cauterization that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then do it around the wrist 1.ij. lines; and if there remains no pain in the two, then do it on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the sleeves or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government with the patient and pour medicines. For if you make good government and you purge phlegm, then you will be healed with the help of God.
of the cut of the surgeon
When the rupture comes in anger, and the boils descend to the coions and it is recently, so that when you see him healed, he does not harm him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; then let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to wash his hair as long as the boils are repaired, and bring them to your hands, and sign on one side of the rupture on the bone with a knuckle, and all a sign that is like half of a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
as long as it is white and wet with sweat. Then bring the boils to their place; and the minister wash his hand so that he does not turn back; and work well the legs of the patient, and put one .i. cussin and one .i. sergeant on the legs, and one .i. other on his pis who wash his hands; then put the cautery on the mark with all your hand, and hold it tight and hold it as long as you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, then start again another time until you touch it; and be careful that the boil does not escape when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure; then, after 3 days cure him with oil until his scorching is done; then cure him with other remedies until he is well, and lie down the patient for 10 days on his back until his wound is well-healed; and it is necessary that his nurses be satisfied for a long time, so that the boil does not escape when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him bring him a well-made bandage and put it on for .xl. other days; and have good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too high braising; and when he has done this teaching, let him completely heal. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter. of the rupture from the abdomen
When ruptures come in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make 1.3 cauterizations of the cauterization depending on its quantity, and let him burn the third of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the old ones said that it must be cauterized at the cauterization at the 1.3 angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the top of the navel and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another from behind, and all the way down to the cauterization. But the first cauterizations are lighter and less painful.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes in any member, or from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be burned with fire which is called "poins", and be burned according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it heals from the first burn, it is good; but if not, start again on that very same name, for this custom is that the fire must move to the member that is closest, so that you must make the burns until the patient is healed.
of health
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
And if the wound is everywhere sparse; and it loses manifestly, so that you cauterize it with these cauterizations which we have said at the head, namely: cauterization in the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and five cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and another delicate one, and two cauterizations on the shoulders, and two on the arms, and two on the legs, and two on the hands, and two in the pits of the hands; and guard those nerves which are under the feet from being burned, that you do not burn them; and make no cauterization on the bone of the finger, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and profit I get; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron weapons. After curing, provide a diet of flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and profit I get; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron weapons. After curing, provide a diet of flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then he makes cauterization on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then the cure with onions until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is ostea the swelling; and yet there is no intermission if he does not know the members and outlets of moving nerves.
Here are the line-by-line translations:
When the disease called "albaras" is awoken, and the medicine has no value, then he cauterizes with a small perfect cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the cure until the blight is ostea and its color is changed; then he cures with flour of beans and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and wormwood and almond of each a part; and let them be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and spread at the place until it is healed.
The cure for syphilis by cauterization
When the chancre begins to appear, and you have seen it, if the cauterization is made with the cauldron that seems 1.i. a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And indeed the sages say that one should also make cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and indeed I do not think this is good, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to do this; and rather, it is better that it be cauterized around, with the cauldron called "circles", as we have said in many cauterizations.
of the swelling that cannot die
When anyone has a disease that is called  "adubelati", and it delays death or because of the surplus of blood that it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hurry to die: then cauterize him inside with small cauterizations by pricking; then let it be. For it will hurry to die.
And if you pierce it completely through the fire cautery, heat the cautery so that this is its shape:
And put your hand between this disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cautery has pierced it, and be such cautery that the patient feels a coldness in some way that the course of the infection is prevented. After the cure until he is completely healed.
The cure with fire by iron:
Another way of disease that is called 'corrodens', and is not other than a member mengeson, for it injures members as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in the raw which can suffer cauterize with fire, then heat the clavicle cauterys small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after cauterize all around until you make the corruption completely go away, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted is Osteit. And then let it be .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure with ointments that generate char.  And if you see after .iij. days that char does not heal, if you start again to cauterize what is delayed corrupted. And this mengeson is never cured with medicine that generates char instead of cauterize fire; but nevertheless cauterize fire is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of medicine that generates char in the division: take it when you need it.
the radishes that come out of the ground
the radishes that come out of the ground can sometimes cause a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hairy thing that bleeds the ground. And the remedies for this disease are as follows: namely, fire cautery, and water cautery. Water cautery is done in this way: first make an incision with a sharp tool like a knife, and so on, in order to prepare a cauterizing instrument; then heat it well with fire, and make it so that it can be inserted into the clove from all sides, and that there are thin margins; after that put it directly onto the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the base; and leave it in this way for 3 days, until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of wild mustard seeds crushed into powder, and leave the poultice on all night, and remove the nail, and will be pulled out from its roots. Then cure the wound by washing it with water as long as it is healed.
and if they convert by default the body, and many times come out of it as hands and feet, then you must bring fire cautery; and there is a similar way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a knife blade, and put it on the nail and the verrus; and put the piece on it so that it turns red all around, then pour hot water on it, and firmly hold your hand, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's path deeper up to the root; and let the disease feel a little of the hot water's bitterness for an hour; then leave it, and it will be pulled out from all its roots. Do this with each one until you have healed all those that are in the body, and then cure the wounds by washing them with water as long as they are healed.
and cure the trembling
When some shiver from cold or fever or another, if it is necessary that you do this .iiij. cauterys or .iv. on the spine of the back, 1. a cautery between each spine; and 1. a cautery at the feet, and 1. to the stomach with olive cautery; will leave them shaking, and will hasten the healing of the cold disease.
of pus-filled blisters
No one should notice any outward signs of corruption in the body or the appearance of blisters that come from large corrupted substances. If it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of a blister at the beginning, when it appears: a fine fire-tipped cautery made from mugwort, or from a root of aristea, or with a lens-shaped cautery. Nor should these be made at the very beginning when they first appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow encrustations before they are broken; but it is necessary that they be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an artery has been cut or torn, or has become blocked with a clot, if it needs to be tied off: tie it off with one knot or two knots, or three knots; and if it needs to be tied off with a ligature, use a wide bandage or a narrow bandage. Many times there are great disturbances of blood from the artery that is torn in the wound that comes to the skin, or incising an abscess, or cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to smell.
Many times there are great disturbances of blood from the artery that is torn in the wound that comes to the skin, or incising an abscess, or cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to smell. If one arrives at any of these, then quickly put your little index finger on the vein wound, and strain it so much that the blood is quietened from your little finger, and neither drop of blood comes out anymore; then take fire-olives, big or small, as many as the wound and its place require, considering that the artery is stopped, and put the fire-olive on this vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood stops.
If he jumps when you lift your finger off the vein, and the fire-olive is extinguished, then quickly take another fire-olive from those that are on fire.
And do not cease to make this one after another as long as the blood is stopped; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short from the blood vessel, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways we have said: or by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread around it, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind and strain firmly.
Who will administer a tight bandage of fire or burning things on, or other similar things, unless he gains from it, he does not do well.
And if this comes to no one and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and not move it often, but keep it wet with cold water often until the blood is frozen and thick and firm; and do an incision in front of this one for whom it is necessary to cauterize and use medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all sickness in which fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the tools, forms, and methods of cauterization are concerned; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, for by this middle path will those who are sick be cured more lightly than those who seek it.
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, o man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterizations, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolishness into account. Because many ways of people come into treatment. If they come from those who, because of their disease, die easily due to the madness that they suffer from its severity and its cruelty; and of these one must be afraid. And of these ones who give you their advice, and say: "Wait, I am about to die"; and the disease is cruel. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken it and lost it; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and this one will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"Or I have ordered this ointment in verses, according to what is before you, that ointment of the cautery, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find it more easily than that for which you need it."
the head full of water
"I know that this disease often comes to children from the mother while she is pregnant; and when the child babbles, it pulls too hard at the head of the child; and for no reason I know why this happens."
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die young; and for this reason it seems to me that I should rather let the treatment alone.
And I saw one child whose shoulders were wet, and the head fell every day until it could no longer be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that he died, and this moisture was so concentrated between the shoulder blade and the spine that you would need to split open the head with a wide slash; and go as far apart as I can:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscess larger, then make two slashes in the form of a cross according to this shape:
If the moisture is between the bones and the signs you see are that the cheeks are overtired on each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three slashes according to this manner:
And after the incision remove all moisture. After that, remove the drape and powder, and put on wine and oil, and leave it so for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound with tendrines and oilmments, and let the head be drawn out evenly, and give to the patient dried meat of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incising is that you observe where the apex of the abscess is, and its connection to the vein; for it is never before, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
So cut there where the abscess opens, and its draining into the vein, and do so according to your power; and be careful not to block the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
Of remedy
When there is a disease called "cataract" or "peale", and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not benefit, then the last cure is to cauterize with what they cover the .ij. arteries.
So then, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient turn his head; after he rubs the place with an arid cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; then look where the vein enters, and the two are next to the ears, and they are joined together; then sign the two with a sharp knife on both sides. As much as the saw cuts to the bone, and this is done by turning the head wide.
And if you see it, pull out the knife and cover the artery on top, cutting it as two sides with a saw.
And when the vein is cut, so that the blood does not stop flowing continuously upwards.
Et s'il le poignent à lor naissance, se li estraint les yeux qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes fixed so that they do not move until they grow.
When the ancient emaciation comes, and catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things, and it is medicined by ways of medical treatments and all that does not benefit him, we draw out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’extraction d’elles si est que li patient feise ruer les poils de ses temples, et entende à l’artère qui apert en la temple, car elle apertura bien par son battement, et est poc repue fuers que en certains homes qui sont trop froids; et s’elle est repue, si extrange son col du patient d’aucuns drapeaux, puis frotte le lieu d’aucun aspre drape, et arrose le lieu d’aigue chaude tant que l’artère aparaisse manifestement; puis pren le spatule de coi ci est la forme:
And the method for extracting them is that the patient rubs the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little filled except in some men who are too cold; and if it is filled, then extrude the patient’s neck from some cloths, then rub the place with no rough drape, and pour hot water on the place until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula where this is the form: then peel the skin lightly as far as you come to the artery, then twist it upwards like pincers, and sever it well from the webs that are of each part; and if the artery is not severed, then does not save all but half in all. For if it is not severed, then does not save all but half in all.
And twist the blood of 5/7 parts as far as 3/4; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in 2 threads of a strong silk thread, that rot can not come before the burning of the wound, and come away from blood; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 lines at that moment itself, and then, if you see, then cauterize with fire cautery as far as the bone as long as the joints are cut; and this is the work of the knife, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm complexion.
For fire cautery is an aid to end moisture: for this is a more powerful aid than moisture. For when extracting arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with well-made cotton wadding; and when they are removed, if you use dry medicines that make blood flow, and tents, until they are healed; and unless you cover the artery with a cup of cauterization, or you employ the leach of vitriol and extract it by hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you have none of these, place your finger on the place until the blood stops, and raise the place with cold water until the blood continues to flow, and is extracted as necessary; and that which is bleeding and lighter in extraction from the artery is that you cauterize the edge of this fire trenchant by half, but let the trenching be well made so that it lasts longer on the heat. For when the instrument is too soft, its heat does not last long. And it must have between the two tools a space of an inch, and then when you have signed with the two edges, and you measure with the hot iron until it comes to the bone, and cap the edge in two edges; and let them be separated between the two joints because it is not bound by this fire cauterization from anything in all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
the tears
When the tears of the eyes come out from the veins that are on the forehead at the base of the head, and the medicine does not benefit them, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel a coldness when moving as if it were frostbitten; and since they are held tight and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls off, and the eyebrows get red, and scarred by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
And it was called the 'old cure' and that is what you do to the sick person whose hair falls out at the base of the forehead, then make .iii. incisions along the length of the forehead evenly; and one of the incisions should be like .ii. two all the way down to the nose, and the others .ii. as far up as the eyebrows, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. mandibles, and each wound should have .iii. dosages at the joins.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
if you cut into the first slit the instrument that is called a 'charlatan', and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side is soft, not sharpened, and this is its shape: And set the blade of the instrument which is called a 'charlatan' towards the back at the end, and the blade towards the bone, and cut it as far as you can into the middle slits. Then do the same on the other side from the middle slit up to the other end; and then remove the bone evenly, and express the blood; then put a piece of old linen in each slit, and put wet drapes of wine and oil and honey there, and keep so that the pustules do not come out; and on the third day unbind him, and wash him thoroughly with cold water, and then apply the basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, as long as he is well.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
When there is no catarrh by custom, and you see the hairs tens and small, and blinding the sight, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it chief in pain ague, and the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those things and that catarrh do not come but from many veins, and this medicine which is, if so be.
And that you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large wound at the front, and another wide one. i. poc. And begin from the wound of the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when he coughs; and when the bone is exposed, if you suck all the blood with a sponge, then wash between the .ij. lips of the wound and put cotton there, and wrap it in wet sheets soaked in wine and oil, and do not heat an abscess; when it has been opened, if you see that characters begin to be born, then cure them with things that dry up, which cause chaps.
In this manner: take  .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and 2/3 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it in these wounds to cause chaps everywhere.
of the stooping of the ears
All who have ears are of the  .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing as iron; or seed, as beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and quickly and similar things.
When it chiles in the ear stone or other manner of thing that does not fit to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, so distil a little violet oil or oil of sesame, then bring extraction; and what is done is to stutter with condiscion, and the nostril stop when the stuttering comes, and puts entor the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and the ear goes up. Many times comes force by this cure; and if it does not come force, so bring extraction with small pins, whereby this is the form:
If it jumps out with the pins, it is good; if this does not happen, so bring extraction with small sharp double-edged tool; and if it does not jump out by this, so take a piece of raindrop and pour the head of the raindrop or passageway of the ear very hard, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot come in with the raindrop; then treat it as described, for many times comes force like this which we have said; and if it does not come force in any way, so take glut from where in take the oisiaus, and put a piece of cotton in; then press the glut on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it. If it does not jump out with the above methods, so split the ear like this that the hot apothema comes, and spasms; and the way of the split should be that you make the first doctor of the head pain, and extract blood according to its measure of virtue, then put the head of the pain between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a little cut in the root of the ear at the fat or depending leech; and let the cut be like the moon, as long as you come to the stone, then the split according to your strength, and suck it carefully in your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy. And if it is seed grain that is infected and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, 2. i. e., the sputum is thick and thin according to this form:
And make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with a thin needle and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
So that the patient uses sneezing as a first condition, and widens the ear with old cotton. And it should be gilled on that ear mid-way where the fluid is; if it is not, it is good. If it is, then take many small pieces according to the length of your finger from one side to the other, and warm them a little at the fire; and put one or another of them into his ear, and saw with one on its side, and with another on the other side; and do not cease to make a piece of stone into another as long as the fluid is all gone, and so it is; and if you see, take 1. i., e., a junc, and bottle one of the ears, and the other chief takes fire until half the junc is burned; then remake the other with others until the fluid is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small core, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large core that one can feel, administer extraction with needles; and this is the lightest thing to extract that is in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, if the patient does not benefit from the treatment as described in the chapter on division and treatment of distillations, look at the ear in the sunlight; if there are no worms, grasp the base gently, and if there are none, consider the shape.
Is it narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. Squeeze the tip of the ear gently according to the amount of pain experienced by the patient; then suck out the contents form the entire canal; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not want to come out, break them with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillations that the old ones tried when extracting worms from the ear, and you will find them where we described the treatment for distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all these instruments, consider this to be the shape as you see it.
And make the ear canal narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; provide a vessel for distilling; and for pressing the distillation out, use a well-made silver instrument; if you have a razor, wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice into it, and add whatever medicines you have to the canal; and let the ear be the shape of an instrument; then dip the cotton into the razor and press it against the ear, with your hand pressing it gently until the oil is distilled or evaporated from the ear; then smell the patient's ear, and the distillation should be warm on the fire as when you distill in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the treatment of earache:
No child is born with any ear perforations; and this same thing happens to adults due to the impact of a wound or a horse's hoof inside the ear, and such impacts never completely enter the ear unless one can't see them; nor does it ever happen that there is just a little hole, and then he sees well.
So if it completely enters unless one can't see it, it is a grave treatment in many conditions, and when this happens that you put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has completed all this scum of which this is the form:
And so it will be useful and sharpen in front and behind all flatly, so that it does not wound the ear; if the operation is a horse's hoof or a horn in the ear, if it holds the fine pinches, and the cover lightly, until this horse's hoof is completely bony.
And if the operation is completely in the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly, then put it on the horn of the ear. If you feel the operation that the sick one feels as if it were an itch at the hearing, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not aggravate the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian oil.
Make no fire for as long as the wound is still sore, or take a tent and soak it in rosewater, and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear escape, so be it that you pull out the tent and move another tent wet with cerotic wax, which has been made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has dried up; then treat it until it is healed.
And if the pain comes from the swelling, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that relieve the pain of the swelling which are or distillers.
of the dust of paper
Take the ash of the papers when they are moist and dry, so be it that you extend them with pliers and tweezers, and dip it in vitriolic broth.
And if not cut short, if the fire cautery of the lenticular cautery is slow, and the cautery maker after incising grows still; and many times return, because nothing stays at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, if those roots are burned and do not return.
of the greasiness
Many times come out in sheets of paper some things that seem greasiness in its form and in its hardness, and for this is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the ovraiges are such: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut the large, then the scorching of each part lightly, then take it at the pincers, and the cap. So you do not can cap without piercing a little the paper, if not grieve nothing to the patient; and if the split is big, if make an assembly with a stitch, and cure as long as she is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the oilmens restorer her soon and harm her.
And if the grandine descends to the inside of the ear towards the upper part, inverses the paper, and are the grandine at a pair of pincers, and cap and press from one side and from the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, this does not grieve anything; and when the grandine is capped, let the oil of salty water, and cure the place where it has been hurt until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinch is a fat that is made in webs of paper above, and this happens more to children of no people, and it grieves them much in their eyes, and they come with morning catarrh, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and for this they lie on their faces from then on, and sleep, and are their paper above their wet sillies that swell and change in appearance from the exinch which opens in the oil. And when you press down the place between your two fingers and feel the exinch between them.
And the way of this oiled cloth so is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a sheet of linen, and make a tent according to the quantity that contains exinch from each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exinch is gathered into the circle; then cut in the middle with a wide blade, and not be any bigger than the wound at the vein's head; and then make the skin in all parts until you come to the exinch; and in several dispositions comes exinch from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then remove all of the oiled cloth between your fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and the left until it is spread out; and be careful that you do not stir in the cut, so that you do not come to all the spatumile except for the oil, so that you do not spoil it.
And if the exit does not open in the beginning of the cut, then make it a little lighter so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the drape with water and put it on its place, and extract the bonds from it.
And if there are such men who grind seel and put on it so that the moisture that is delayed is corrupted. Then let the doctor treat as long as he is healthy. And if it comes to the base of the arm, let the doctor treat with poultices soothing until he is healthy.
of hair papers
When hair papers come out, other than nature's, and are dried up, if they harm the hairs, and cause ways of diseases as tears do, and the softening of papers and albugine, so that it is a cause of the destruction of the hairs; and the doctor is according to 3.iij. ways: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine ague according to what it is in front, or chapister of cautery, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by caines, according to what I will say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap, and then return the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; but if not, pour an needle into all i. thread above; and let the end of the hair be removed from these hairs, and let the thread run through all the skin, and return it to the shaver; then make a hole in the part of the hair, remove the hairs carefully, covering all the spatumile, from the great wound to the small; then pull out the thread, and place the paper over with a little cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper a figure of an ear, as the furrow of the myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if there is a need that it should take a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make in all the spatumile on the ii. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great wound to the small; and let it be a split near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil into one of the ii. corners of the four, then scorch it entirely; then join the ii. lips with a stitch of a needle on all i. thread of fine wool, and wash the blood, and make air for the excess of the threads on the ii. sorcels on nothing sticky, if you see to do this; and if not, then have no care, then leave the stitch and the threads until iii. or iv. days; then cure the wound without a stitch with dry and constrictive things, because the paper relaxes at the sound of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is damp (as the old say), and it is work without fear;
and if there is another way: and that you sign the paper with a figure that is also as the furrow of the myrtle, as we have told, with iii. oncins divided according to the form that is here:
and then chop what rises at small heights evenly according to the form which is here:
if you don't have the ability to hold the tweezers, and that thing is not even, then take an needle where there is .i. thread, and wrap it around the shape; and a different thread from the other one, and wrap it around the big wound, and the second one around the little one, and join them evenly between your fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have cut, as we have told you, then sew together the 2 lips of the wound with sutures, and calm it down with cerate and similar ointments that soothe;
and there is no chance that the hair on the paper turns white: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the suture, in this and that, is more artificial.
The cure for canes so is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fent inside according to what I have said, and then make 2.i. nails by art, and 2.i. threads also fine as the paper and the largeness of the spatium is; and chop at the 2.i. ends of the 2.i. parts where you hold the threads; then join the one and the other finely on what rises from the paper with the oil, and strain the 2.i. nails of the 2.i. parts together; and leave it so for some days, and the skin that is stretched will be blackened and dried up and peel off.
If it delays, if the copestone has hardened, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sewed up, and if the paper has been removed, then they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
If it delays, if the cast has hardened, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn up, and if the paper has been removed, then they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: The ovations are such that you press a very fine needle, and pour 1 line of very fine silk thread; then assemble the chief and tie them together finely, and be the length of the threads one palm of length; then order in the chase 1 other very fine thread of silk quickly, and tie the chiefs to it; then put the patient's chief onto you; and be the sun shining so that the ovations are inclined, for they are very fine and small, then pour the needle into all the chase at the root of the hair placed there, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then draw out the hair up to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the chase through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes out of its hole above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and pour in the oil and let it run 12 or 13 times, until the hair grows in its place and the hair comes up; and if the hair is small, then accompany 1 long hair of nature, and let it be carried with that which you leave, until it is stretched out and then let it down.
About oil poisoning
When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil poisoning, comes about in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It also occurs suddenly due to a wound, scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method for treating this involves breaking that seal and separating the lips from it, and placing linen inside, and keeping it there until it heals; and you should not use anything that dries and restricts it. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before; but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and brew water or ale or linseed oil, and melt castor oil, and wrap a linen cloth around it, and treat it with that.
And the treasures of your cure are that you take care that it does not become sealed in the same way as before; and the remedies we have mentioned are only used to treat this disease if it does not return in the same form as before.
of the horse that comes in oil
This is the translation:
Here is the translated text:
Here is the translation:
I will not
Here is the translation of the text:
I will not
Here is the translation of the text:
And the manner of incision is so that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens the hairs; and take the paper to your hand, then curl the nail at the fingernails, and stretch it above; then take an needle, and I put 1.i. hair of a horse, or a cow, or a buffalo, and 1.i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the needle, and tie the nail to a thread and stretch it above, and peel off all the skin except the pulp and silk at the hair to the head, then cut off what remains in the root of the fingernail so that by incision does not come out the cors of tears customarily; and never stretch the nail to the oncene, and to the thread, as we have said; then peel all the spatumile up to here is the shape:
And keep that the spatumile does not touch the raw cloth and break it, and that the prune is not pricked; and after incision pour a little rope into the oil, and of the colier made of litargire, and leaves it until the other day; then he curates what it seems to him as long as he is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle in, and the ungle can not enter, this resemblance of nails of medicines is cured many times; and are born sicom I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, so operate the oil of the patient, and take the light spatumile poc according to this form:
And re-set the finger above very gently, and if you see that it thins out little by little and the rash increases, then distil from your mouth in the oil collar made of litarge and red dye and stop the oil until the other day; then start again with the other work according to this same operation until it is all healed.
And if nothing is opposite to it in the oil, as an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is well, and then start again with the work as before, until it is well.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts greatly in the oil, so suspend it for a long time, and take a part of it, not all at once, until tears no longer come out; then distil into the red oil collar, which is made of litarge.
of the meat that grows on the cherry
Here is the translation of the text:
And when the incision is complete and all the hair has been removed, then pour into the oil a little crushed sesame seed oil or you may distil therefrom a little red oil and other corrosive medicines, and put cotton on top of the oil with a ribbon made of cow's urine, so that it is secure from infection; and if he delays nothing, and the wound begins to open, then leave the oil and treat the wound with drugs that soothe the wound; and then return to your cauterizing until it is healed, and do so by means of this appearance.
However, it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil according to nature; and of accidental causes, in iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that the limbs are suffering from that treatment.
of the hairs
the hairs red are those that are covered with oil, and they tolerate the sight of his work and weaken the oil all the time. It is therefore necessary to the first one that you look at the oil, because sebel is, and otherwise, and there is no other disease than sebel; so then do this in this way: For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then hold those hairs at a distance from all sides according to his wisdom, and make the hairline thin twice according to this form:
and let them be cut by degrees in two courses according to this form: And let there be two inches between each course according to this form:
then cut the hairs finely, and wash the blood after another hour, as much as you see remove the hairs forcefully from the oil; and guard that you do not blur the oil at the tips of the spatumiles, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only capture the hairs forcefully; and when you have done this, if you will, distil into the oil green and red vinegar to corrupt what is delayed from sebel.
And if you have no power to catch all of them in that hour, so make a paste on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is soothed and assured by the warmness, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the oil
The mirrour thus is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, so split it on the aposteme, leaving there where it should die, and draw out all the moisture that it has, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, so resect it entirely with this instrument whereof the shape is; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be done from an iron chief, and be pointed as a lime is pointed in this present form:
And put it on the broken bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you can feel that the corruption has set; and do not repeat this, but return to the place of dry medicine.
If the bone is固着，然后把它转动到你两只手之间，并用手轻轻按压直到你感觉到骨头已经愈合了; 并且不要重复这个动作，但要返回干的药物的位置。如果它已经愈合，而且没有感染，那么就知道它是健康的; 如果不是，那么除了根据上述方法将漏斗带回耳朵外，就没有其他办法了: 也就是说，你把骨头从第二个角度用铁棒翻转过来，并用药水浸泡，当它翻转的时候，铁棒应该是柔软的，就像你看到的那样。
然后把它放在骨头上，用手轻轻按压一会儿，然后取下来，不要让它长时间保持在骨头上; 然后把它放到干的药物中，就像我教你的一样，当它变软的时候，就知道它已经愈合了，如果它仍然紧贴着骨头，那么就知道它没有愈合; 只有这样才不会给病人带来痛苦。
of the oil
When the hairs are all cut, and there is no disturbance of the blood, nor decrease, if you lay the patient down, then heal, then put leeching plates or bandages so as not to hurt him, then put on the oil.i. made of acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then strain the oil, and plaster it on bandages and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you squeeze the drapes enough soft, and double each one in 2 .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of hairs he needs; then strain it through a hard bendail, and begin again with the leeches so as not to hurt him; then take off the leeches and leave the strained oil day and night, and if you see the oil repair, it is good; if not, then begin again with the plastering and bandages and the oil and leeches until he is healed.
When the web of a fly is broken
When the web of a fly is broken and it comes apart, then open, and comes like paper so that you can see it; therefore if you cover it, the work is such that you push an needle into the root of the part near the edge until it comes out at the other side, and then push another needle where there are two threads from the edge; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then tie one end of the thread, and draw it tight, then strain the needle and put on the oil of myrrh; and leave it as long as the thread twitches with the web, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never do the wound any harm by pushing the web back into place with a circle of cloth around each part, until it is healed.
And if the hairs have reached their full length, pierce them with a fine needle that comes out completely from the oil, and draw out the moisture of the albugineous pus and cut the hairs, and then remove them so that they are healed.
of the oil
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but oil that seems like water coming down, and yet it is not water; and the way to treat the appearance of this dislocation is so: sit the patient upright on a bed, and right side up, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and hold it up while you see the oil come out on top of the hairs; then cut off the oil with a sharp needle, and let it fall away; and see that it does not shine or glisten, and know that it is water, and that the coming out of the oil is not like the appearance of the dislocation as we have said. If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine needle and pierce it through the skin, where it comes out completely from the oil; and if it comes out with moisture of the albugineous pus, cut the hairs, and then remove them so that they are healed.
of water from the oil
Here is the translation of the text from Old French to English:
"After a short rest, and then let the fluid return by itself; when it is fully returned, remove the instrument lightly, turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little of the clear liquid into the oil again, and leave it there. Then put on one side the oil which has been used with plenty of water, and mix it with the pure oil. We, and those who are with us, will put on a light coat with plenty of water."
"If almagda cannot enter the oil due to its thickness, for there are some people who have too thick hairs; then you must use the instrument which is called 'alberit'; of which this is the form:"
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre apareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprouve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faisses ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.
Now then, carefully separate the conjunctive parts, and do not go too far with it, but make it smooth, and pour in the alum, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a  .i. bed-holder coming, so that he sleeps on his back in a  .j. dark room; and he should be deprived of all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him up according to his condition until the third day; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then let him loose until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is appropriate that you tie him up, so that he may mount quickly.
And some came to us from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in their country they make alum by pouring water onto the ash, but I have never seen this myself, nor read of it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of aluminum, so that those who do not know them may see; and let them be of pure bronze.
And let the head of this mixture be of the most subtle substance, and the rear in three corners sharp.
from the charnel on the neck
And none of these animals are born or neis charnel on the neck; of which there are some that seem to be scorpions at the mouth of the pie; and if there is such a one or not it is char enchanteresse de fux; and if there is a char souef of good color, in that same char of souef let the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nose, and put the oncidium to those chars, and tie them firmly; then take this that you can hold at the spatumile subtle taken from one side, until you know that this char is all oste.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
If there is nothing that can be covered, if the opening is for any of the small, light instruments, so that it does not remain stopped; and without raising you up, or an abscess, so that it heals as it should; and if they are malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them as soon as possible, until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour or squeeze slowly and steadily or quickly or wine.
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp that is open, like a tube, and conduct it as well; and if you see, then make a closed tube, and let the instrument rest there while they heat the oil or any liquid.
from the wound over the neck
Many times a wound on the neck causes a disease called "thunder", and grows and becomes very large until it is seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut the head at the beginning, and burn the bone completely, then put fire or medicine over it; and if you delay to cover it until it is very large, if it is hard and dry in color, of poor smell: if not touch it with iron because it is a swollen pustule, for when you cover it once, great evil comes to the patient; and the pustule is touched gently, not with iron because it is dry in color, and you see that he can cover it completely without pain, and cure the site with drying and restraining things.
when the neck is cut and cured
when the neck is cut and cured
The manner of sewing is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
the sores on the lips
For in the hands of the patient, there appear within the lips hard sores, resembling grain of sand, and smaller and larger; so then you must turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take hold with tweezers and pluck out each part; then apply the vinegar broth to the place, until the blisters are dried up; and then wash it with water from that, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
the chapped lips
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraints et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
Here is the translation of the text line by line in English:
"Noz jours ne sont pas assemblées au chef des dents, à l'intérieur de la bouche entre les gencives, des écorces qui sont laides et rugueuses ; et aucune fois sont les dents noires et citrinelles et ternes, jusqu'à ce que la corruption atteigne la gencive, et que les dents soient puantes. Si tu commandes au patient de te laisser tenir par les mains, et que sa tête soit entre tes mains, et que tu arraches les dents ou les écorces qui apparaissent, tant qu'il ne reste rien ; et ainsi fais de la noirceur et du verdâtre, et de la jaunisse et des autres taches, jusqu'à ce qu'elles soient saines ; et si l'on ose le faire une première fois, c'est bon ; si non, si on recommence à le faire le deuxième jour et le troisième, tant que tu aies tout arraché ; et sache que les dents doivent être arrachées avec des instruments de diverses formes, selon ce que l'œuvre démontre, pour ce qui est du rasoir dont on arrache les dents ont d'autres formes que celles dont on arrache les écorces entre les dents ; et ces formes et d'autres soient prêtes avec toi."
It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as much as you can, because this must not be done at all; for this is a very high substance until such time as one has no excuse to draw it out. Then when the patient is forced to have a tooth drawn, it is necessary that you are certain about the hurting tooth; often the pain leaves the patient and he thinks it is his sound tooth, and has the tooth drawn; but nevertheless the pain remains because we have already proved this with these honorable men; and when you are certain about the hurting tooth, then you should scrape under the tooth with a strong scraper so as to ward off the gums on all sides; then you place it in your hand or fine pliers at one hole after another until it is well loosened, then you tighten the pliers; and let the patient’s jaw be between your knees, and hold it fast so that it does not move.
Then draw the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take one of these instruments and push it in from each side lightly, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is stuck and bleeding, then fill it with gauze, where the cracks are; and if it is carefully held between pliers, so that it does not break when it is drawn, and it is necessary to cut lightly under the gum on all sides, then draw it out.
And you do well to avoid breaking it, and leaving a part of it, and causing great pain to the patient from the root more than before. And you guard that you do not do so as does the ignorant doctor, who, because of his haste and audacity, often breaks the chariot, and does not properly administer this which we have counted; but instead brings about any kind of disease at the root that he delays, or by the chariot that he breaks, as we have frequently wanted to prove; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the hole with wine or tar and salt; and if it runs red with blood, that often comes from the root, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools, so that they do not mute the teeth first, are long tips and large handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold the mu
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in place when pulled, if you put cotton soaked in oil or butter on the joint for two days, until the roots are smooth, then bottle up the pliers that are called "algefri", so that the jaw looks like a file; and let them be shaped inside as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots will not come out to all these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the whole of the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī' ", that is to say, the pales, from which it comes:
And be it light or heavy so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by this, it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter:
And if you help yourself with this instrument which has .ij. rains, from which it is the shape:
and other iron instruments which are before in the reasoning of the dens, and of this instrument which seems like great grips, whose is the shape:
And so this instrument should be made in such a way that it cannot break; and know that most of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master surgeons are subtle who try their instruments by themselves according to what their work and the disease show them, for there are many diseases where the old do not teach an instrument because of the diversity of the; And if it does not break the chariot or other bones, where he will lie, if he searches for the instruments that it is right that you said, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And let there be large and good-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines fitting for this person, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural form of the jaw, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is right that you should know if the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then the raze; and if it is hot with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is given here, which seems like a small beak, and is made of iron:
And the jaw bone is broken and broken by the pain of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be cut, then he cuts with a knife as this form:
And it is also as the bone from which we make needles; and in cutting the tooth, cut with a knife gently so that it does not move until it breaks; then in the end with any razor, and its edge is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then it is necessary to cut the roughness so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the teeth are loose,
When the teeth are loose, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press upon what he chews; and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but it does not help; if you can restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold wire never moves; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain, then take the wire and double it up between the 10 teeth, then put the teeth together with the wire, if there are more than 10, until you feel a tight fit on the healthy side; then restart the tightening gently and carefully, until it does not move at all; and if it relaxes, or the wire comes loose, then tighten it again with another wire; if it takes time and will serve for that whole time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the 10 healthy teeth and the 10 missing ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and patient should be involved, and never is the form of a tooth of an elk made, and it is put back in its place where it has fallen out, and is held as we have said, and delayed and kept thus for a long time.
To make a cup of copper from the tongue
No cup is made from the tongue or nature, that comes from it; or by accident of a sore wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and have his head in your hand, and take his tongue; then take a large copper wire and tie it tightly to the tongue, so that it does not move at all, and if there is pain or no pain, and this is done from a wound, then bite the wire and tie it with a knot; and be careful that the cut does not become too tight, for the artery is nearby; and when you have done this, take hot rose water and dip the tongue in it each night, so that the ring does not harden. And if the pain comes again, apply fire to the fire wound, which is good for this; then cure him with other remedies until he is well,
and if you see any white or black color or hard thing, so that the sick person does not smell it, or touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining to yellow, and there is moisture, then pour the wine, and make it with a thin spatulate blade, and deliver from one part and another; and if he does not come to you in your work, put him on vitriole broied until he is healed, and return to your work as long as you draw all of it; then lift up the water of salt and silk, and cure him with other remedies until he is well.
from the throat
from the throat come boules which are called “godath”, and they are called properly 13. mandules, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess of small size and red color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron for its blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover, but first look that the abscess is hot and calmed down. Then place the sick person in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap, and he opens his mouth and puts his fingers between his teeth, and presses the tongue onto all the instrument, for this is the shape; and it should be of silver or thin gold as our knives:
So you press the tongue onto all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the hook and put it in the mandule, and draw it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with, then cover the instrument, for this is the shape, which seems a strong thing; and nevertheless his head is crooked, and one side above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or thin gold:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with pliers, for this is the shape:
And be cut from one side and not from the other; and when you have cut one of the amygdales, if you cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and easy water, and if they are going away, then gargarize the patient with water, or with cooked pomegranate seeds, or with fennel leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure him as long as he is well; and never let other apothemas be born in the throat than the 20 amygdales, if they are cut like them.
I treated a woman for an apothema that was lying in her throat, that is to say, one small apothema; and I had well closed up all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for a single day or two days. And the apothema was so high that it had been rained upon 12 times by the 12 passages where the rain entered. So I waited a while, and then inserted an awl into one of the 12 passages, then drew it out, and cut off a large portion of the bow; then I did the same on the other side of the passage where the rain entered, and pressed her mouth shut and pressed her tongue; then I inserted the awl into those apothemas, and some of them came out whole, but a little bit of blood came out; so the woman's passage in her throat was opened up again, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off that apothema for a long time; and the apothema recrossed itself again, and filled up the place that I had emptied before, until it was very large; so I sewed it up again, and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stayed without growing any larger; and I left those parts, and there was only God who cared for them afterwards.
from the wine
When the swelling goes down from the injury to the skin, and it is far away, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, then it is called "swelling". When it has healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the chaps of the abscesses are pacified, and they are thin, then you should cut them; and which is round and not far away, and it is bloody or purple or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger with this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blueness and its distance, that you cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then stick the onyx into the swelling, and twist it around, and cover it with .i.ii. instruments which I have said in the incision of .i.ii. almonds. And it should not be covered more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i.ii. almonds, and heal until it is well. And if the patient has a fear of being covered, then you should use an instrument to cauterize his pain. The manner of cauterizing is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned, where there is the form:
And put out his head where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and put the instrument into all the medicine on the swelling; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he sweats and the saliva runs from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down his throat and hurt him; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the swelling for half an hour, until you see it turn black and the medicine's bite is pacified; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument into all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton is soaked through; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and cut it after 2.4 days or 5 days. And if you need to refresh the cauterization of the medicine, then refresh it, and after the cauterization rinse with cold water, and cure with gargles until it is well.
This cure is safer than the incision, or only the cauterization; if it is cured with fumigation according to this manner, take calamus and ysop and oreganum and rue and chamomile and yarrow and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them in 1. pot, and pour water on it easily, and make it boil; and the pot should be well covered with strong clay, and dip the instrument into the pot according to this manner: And of silver or gold, and one of the head bottles in the mouth of the sick man as long as the vapour rises to the vein through the cane, until the vein is dead; then he begins often, until the vein dries up, and keep that you do not make that at the beginning of the coming of the abscess warm, for many things have come there; and do not make that either but at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put it in his head a hook of smoke, so that the mouth of the sick man does not become too hot; because the hook of smoke does not weigh down the vapour on the mouth, and this is good together and saves health.
Often there comes to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you should take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you should make the sick man vomit so that his meat is cooked in his stomach; perhaps if it comes out by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or  .i. slice of dry bread; and he puts a thread to the sponge, and then swallows her; and when she arrives to the place, if she is hard, and then you pull hard; and if she does not come out of that which we have said, take  .i. instrument of plonk according to this form:
And take the instrument curved to the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat and has the head lifted up; and keep that you do not touch the epiglottis, that no one of them comes down, or do not put the bone in; and make sure that the sick man swallows the instrument, for if he does not swallow it, then let him throw it away; or he takes it in his hand and moves it forwards and backwards evenly until it comes out.
of the blood in the throat
No times is medicinee the blood, if as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, because you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, so treat with a small hook, or small claws that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, so take a hair of a dog, and put it in the throat of the patient, then bottle up or drink from the hair  .i. hot, and do this often. And if the patient has a sore throat all day, so take full  .i. cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it run down, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit.
And if it does not spit as we have said, so subfumigate the patient with asafetida, at the instrument that I have told you in the fumigation of the uvula; do this many times, because she will not spit unless you do so. And the way of the fumigation is that you squeeze a pot where there are charbons vis, and place it on a covered vessel to make smoke in the middle, and in the perforation of the instrument; then pour your fumigation onto it, and let the patient put his tongue out into his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the blood; and the blood will now come out, and if it does not, then restart the fumigation many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty things and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then let him rest as much as this treatment requires.
And the shape of the instrument with which you treat the blood should be such that you can see the blood, if it is, as when you can see the tongue; it should seem to resemble a pair of scissors for driving into the throat; and have the appearance of a file, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and consider this form:
the capitis of the abscesses
The capitis of the abscesses are, according to what this reminder comes from a and b in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in cutting; and it is in 2 ways that one is in its middle semblance, and of what it holds moisture. And the second way if it is for the leus where it is at the core. For the abscess of the chief head is other than that of the fundament, and the abscess of the charnut leu is other than that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if a abscesses don't need to be pierced at all, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if a of such that it is necessary to pierce when it is crut, and do not die at all according to its fulfillment, as if an abscess that are of joint del. For when an abscess comes from joints, and one leaves him as long as he is porris inside, by chance if the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is of the principal member, and if you delay the perforation as much as it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or it is of the fundament, if you pierce it thus that it be dead; and do not come that you pierce an abscess crut without digestion accomplished, so that one who is of the fundament, that he does not porrise perfectly, and be alongied inside, and i comes fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is calmed down, and the departure of the fever, and the diminuation of the pain and redness, and the debate and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation where most dependent leu of the abscess, and the place where he opens mues; and be li perforation of long du cors, and if the abscess is as mains or as piez, or in joints and at nerf and arteres, and to all leus igalz where it has no ploieure.
Here is the translated text:
Here is the translated text:
Here is the translated text:
And what is to be known about this in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter on the paste.
of sores
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"In the treatment of sore and rocky abscesses, it is lighter because they are full of blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or chief that do not have moisture, and if these are the same Chief-assessments that I mentioned before, as those that come from an old woman's breast; and I found the assessment just like a stone X-high, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one of them were to be cut, it would make a wound as good as a stone. In other Chief assessments, they are such that they depend entirely on their most dependent places, in order to have the bow out; and cure them as is appropriate."
of the scrofula
Of the scrofula Many times has the abscess at the throat, and desolves the armpits, and angers, and never come to any other place or to the skin, and are hot, and are swollen together. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, as well as the nodule and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not obey health. In those therefore that you see to be of good disposition to the touch, and seem to be of the color of the flesh, and are mute on either side, and are not drawn out from the neck nor from the artery nor from the conduit, and are not deeply embedded; it is fit that you cut them off from above, and skin each part, and are the twenty-four lips of the throat as one, if you have need, as we have said concerning the abscess at the back of the head; and do this little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut too deep, lest the hand escape, and look not too far forward, lest you should cut too much.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, then put vitriolic acid on the wound, or some powders that restrain blood, and strain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula is hardened, if there are no small scrofulas at the base, then cut them and clean them. And if there is a large lump at the root of the scrofula, it is not fit that you should cut the scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then apply the dressing.
And if you cut all the scrofula, then it is fit that you should gather together the 20 lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there should be no delay because of the size of the scrofula. If it is fit that you should cut off its root, and squeeze it hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, too, depending on, then introduce tendrils with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts that which is delayed from corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then cure it with ointment with garlic, as long as it is healthy.
of squint
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
For those who have squint, it is necessary that the wedge of the throat, which is called "epiglotte", be removed; and one should not seek aid from anyone, since all the veins and the main artery of the disease are at the bottom of the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. mandres. When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
It is then necessary when we want to split the epiglottis that we do it desoz 2 or 3 circles or a small slit through, between the 2 or 3 circles or by the quantity of the split in the cartilage;
and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no charnel, and the vessel is long of it.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the charnel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the cartilage, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the throat that jumps out by the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, join the .ij. lips of the wound from below the cartilage, and then administer drugs that produce blood, until it is healthy.
Albuicasim says that we should not do this as long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves him. Then put a covering over the larynx so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and in this way he is preserved from death; and
and so command the elderly to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iij. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw; I saw a young lady take a knife and put it in her throat, and she ran to the pond of the palace;
and I was called by the healer, and I found her as well dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had come out of it, and I saw well that she had not cut a vein or caused any injury except in her throat, and her pulse was far from being firm.
I rushed, and sewed up the wound, and I treated it until she was healed;
and the young woman had only a hoarse voice, and returned to her usual self later on.
for I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
of the large throat
is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large hernia in the color of a yolk, and is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: nature and accident; or nature has nothing to do with it.
And this accident happens in two ways: one is like fatty flesh to us, and the other way is like an abscess coming from us by artery. and there is fear, and it does not come to operate fire on but in that which is small, and prove and search in all the intramuscular. if you find it as well as fatty flesh, and cannot do anything, if it breaks, if it breaks like our own, and tries all the bones, if there is any. and search well, and treat if necessary, so that he is perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
and it is necessary that I give the full difference between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is sharp and hot-headed, until the boiling is passed, and is complete; then rest the heat and the fever.
With no heat or fever or pain, and contains a kind of medicine that is in the same color as the body, and begins also like a yolk, and grows big;
and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to cure the head, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the paste which is after.
And the way of the inquiry of abscesses is that you squeeze or the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the intruder, and take care not to let it fall.
If a cut runs through the skin, as I have said about other abscesses,
and if after the intruder there is no moisture, knowing that it is greasy, then let him cut it crosswise, and pick it up with tweezers, and scrape it lightly from each side, and take care not to tear it, and you will get it out whole.
and if you cannot get it out whole, then cut it into pieces so that nothing is left behind.
For if I do not wait, if it returns to us again and again;
and if it takes a little while, and if he does not grieve us, then take the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on the wound something that is warm, and heal other wounds until it is healed;
and if we are very ill, then cut the wound with the 3 fingers of the hand, and heal what is caused by the thorn;
and if the wine is opposite or another, then hurry and employ the place of vitriol, and leave it there for 3 days or 3 days, until the wound is putrefied, and return to the cup where it was kept;
Here is the translation of the text:
"They are also like the needles used for piercing sorcery, and they are made of yellow gold, iron, or silver, and the ones that are more tested against black lead to encircle the corbels of fistula."
"They are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the aperture."
"The shapes of the instruments are varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also instruments with three quadrants that come in three sizes."
and if there are those who have .iij. coronets, and also they are of .iij. ways; and if there are those who have .ij. coronets, and once a crown only, and they are of .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these things are sharp, and such I have who do not cut but on one side, from which one shaves the hair, so that the vein or the nerve is not chopped.
and of these interventions are the aleines returned in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of 3 ways: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
and don't use any but what is natural to its place, if it is a leg, or an arm, or a breast, or an elbow, or similar things;
and never make any other instrument small, resembling to the shape of a fist, according to this form, so that it is stifled with blood:
and never put it in the place that heals by cutting into veins and arteries, and never do it according to this great form:
and never pump up the breasts of some men when they are corrupted, until they look like a woman's breasts:
and they grow slower and sicker, and those who cure them, if it is according to this form of the line B. until: . then scorch the fat, and employ the wound with medicine by boiling water, then join the 15 lips of the wound to sew, and heal as long as it is well;
and let him swallow the clean water, and is moistened by its greatness if it has women, if he makes them in 15 ribs on top, with 15 similar cuts; so that one holds the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from the line B. until the line G.; Then remove the skin between the .ij. lips, and cut away the fat, and add that which we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as he is healthy;
and if he is not healthy, or the incision has not been completely made, so that the patient cannot rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and let it sit until the meat and fat are cooked, then treat it as long as it is healthy.
the abscesses of the elbows
The cysts that come from abscesses are handled from hard scrofula or if they have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are voided, if you employ cotton wool, and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from this time onwards until they are well.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the bowels break open, then apply the fire cautery as we have described.
from the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin is tightened over it, then there are often abscesses, and also to the escaping vein and absces
and if one pierces it at that point when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long enough to come out completely. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and if it is for the vein, then you should feel a retraction; and if it is for the arteri
and it is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated the shoulder and at the neck and mouth other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the treatment with fire should be avoided, and that of the chief also, and in that of the swelling of an artery cut through the skin from above.
Therefore, the treatment with fire should be avoided, and that of the chief also, and in that of the swelling of an artery cut through the skin from above. then work on the waist as if it were a belt, and separate the artery from the tissues carefully, until it is uncovered;
then thread a needle and pierce it through the other side of the waist, holding the artery with a double thread of silk, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
and then point out the level that is between the .ij. links of an intermitter as long as there is a space there, and unbind the abscess;
then order the cure for a bow-shaped wound, as long as the link is injured; then treat with a paste made of honey and vinegar, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, so that you have to hold it with your hand where you can feel the abscess all over the skin, Then dip the needle in the oil that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and there is .ii. thread of two, so that you draw it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or one of the two ends to the two shoulders of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread is not secure, then dip another needle in the oil at both ends of the same thread to the incision of the first needle, and stretch out the threads in four directions;
Then cut the abscess as much as possible, then cut the excess away from the incision and leave what is tied down;
Then wet his head with wine and oil, then administer the treatments for fever and bad smells until he is well.
of the nerves
Also, when the arteries and veins are inflamed, they cause pain in the nerves, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens in the joints of the arms and legs, and in all parts of the body where there are joints; and it is a sign of pain, and its color looks like the color of blood, and it is in many conditions without pain.
and when they have been bound together, if the patient feels pain, and is not perfectly healed, but continues to move;
and be quiet on all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and that which is in joints does not come together with iron: perhaps there will be contraction;
and that which is at the head or at the forehead, make the skin with a scythe. If the nails are small, if it has one nail, and cut it in its root;
and if it is large, if the suspension is at the root, and the scorching, then the bone and sews the wound with a stitch, and cares until it is healthy.
with large bellies hanging down No times has there been in bellies and not any other part thelull, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of ash, and is the subtle root, and the big knot; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a home who had .ij. bellies that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were broken, and ran with moisture.
I measured and found one to weigh sixteen ounces, and the other seven. The work of this chapter is that if you look at the patient, he is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist and has a fine root;
If the cup is too large, and fire cautery is not possible in your presence. For the surgeon often makes too great a wound with the knife, and it will cause pain without your help, so hurry to cauterize;
and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the incision with fire, then take a well-made piece of string, and bind the arteriole as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to cut the string as long as it binds the arteriole, and feel through it for work; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at cauterizing it by the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it,
And then cauterise him so that he does not come again; and then treat the wound, and keep so that you do not cover the plug which is of yellow color and of poor sense and of milk-like substance.
For this is an abscess that has become inflamed, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer below.
when the meat is boiled
As the appearance of the boiled meat comes by fire cautery of wound or incision of syph, and is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the flesh and by the issue of the bile, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and an opening of various issues. And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its two sides so that it returns, and then returns again, and perhaps is caught, and increases much at the entrance of the bath, and by strong work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then opens by these signs, the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity;
and if it is by wind, then it is a breath in the chest, and the work if you look at its appearance is that of blood from an artery, or vein, or wind. If it is necessary that you leave the patient to heal on his own. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on the treatment of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the bowel. then instruct him to move slowly between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed with all your hands, then make the top half of the apophtheos up to all the large hook.
then extend the top half of the apophtheos over the thread, and dip your index finger, and feel the intestine; If you find that he is caught in the thread, if he slips, then dip the intestine at the end of the belly;
and if you see the fever, if it takes hold of the flesh, and cut off its excess.
and if the artery is against him or he has a vein, then he should breathe deeply, and then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and thread them with .ii. strings, and thread the .ii. needles through what you have made, so that you have pierced it;
and then stretch the abscess in .iii. leaps above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place open until it has rotted, and cut out the dead flesh by itself; or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood where you see moisture, then heal the hole of that which it covers, and bind the hole.
the ulcer
We have spoken in the division of the appearances of ulcers, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should prevent the cure of iron; and we say that the ulcer is inherited in the marrow, and great care must be taken in the cure, and the ancient man said that when ulcers are in a good place where they can be cut like an ulcer on meat, or in a pot, or in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is small; and when it is large and old, then one should not approach it, for I have never healed any such; nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge any black blood; then make it healthy if it has shown repletion, then afaite the blood.i. good ground for doing the work; then throw your onions or ulcers, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press hard on the spot in your hand or on any thing, and if it resists the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
On gout On gout lieve the patient straight in your hands, and the minister pressing the belly at the lowest part of the body, then take the spine-like spatumile according to this form: And let it be cut from both sides. a point, and always so that it cannot come up to the intestine when you put it on, and cannot be wounded; and let it not be so thick that it cannot be inserted into the patient's body:
then look if the gout is deposited toward the intestines: it is necessary that you split on both sides of the arm pit.iij. two right above the elbow; and if the gout is due to liver disease, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit.iij. two; and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient lies down on the split so that the superfluities do not run into the weak one; and
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze your hand into all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as well as when peeling back by an inch or so; then pierce the syfac until the spatumile comes to a natural stop, and this is the hole for water, then tighten it further, and bottle up this instrument from which there is a shape: And it looks like a silver cane that is fine, and is of brass or copper that is very light, and has in its portion  .i. small opening; and where it costs on one side, .iij. openings; and 2 on the other side, and 1 on the other; and the head is cut so as to resemble a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes cuts feathers:
at the top of the head is the temple, so that when the instrument comes to water, he should now bend over it on the instrument; empty half or one-third, because if you empty more than that at that time, perhaps the patient will die through the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will shake his palms, or come close to death;
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person are, and his pulses; then tighten the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the pulse that stops at the syfac, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument the other day, if you see the sick person suffering, and tighten a little quantity of water:
Do not make any fire, and beware of going out in the cold until it has stopped raining a little. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave water on him, then let the cure of the grave or mud be hot, and by sweating or bathing and under the sun, and let it turn black from drinking; and let the cure of drying medicines continue as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said above.
of the stopping of the penis No child born with a small foreskin or one that is not in its place should be circumcised too soon, for if it does not have enough time to form a prepuce, then a very thin prepuce of leather will form according to this form: then tie the prepuce with a thin piece of leather and fasten it for 15 or 20 days until he has urinated, and then release it; and if by chance it has not been properly circumcised, because the urine that comes out is strong, then release it. Those who have a small foreskin or one that is not in its place should be circumcised when they are old enough to form a prepuce, as we have said before, if it becomes thicker. Those who do not have a foreskin at all because their foreskin does not reach the top of their penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is erect; and they cannot conceive by anything that the material does not come out until the marriage, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of the cautery is that the sick man lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are held as a pen is held, so that it pierces in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the escape of blood, which often happens, and if it does happen, let the one who stops the bleeding stop it, and cure the wound until it is well.
of the penis Many times a sore comes to the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are bad ones and good ones; so that you should squeeze them with great subtlety, and cut and grind them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diafinicon until it is well. And if the sore is malicious, of color and pus, then it is appropriate that you apply cauterization to it. When you have cut it, and the sore is in the peil of the penis, and some of it is inside and some outside, then it is appropriate that you take out the sore that is inside first; and when it has healed, then heal the outside one. For when you heal them together, unless they are firmly closed, then the hair of the penis will be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into its hair and where the cow's hide was; so it is appropriate that you cover all that is black and corrupted, then put it on plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from pomegranate skin and times, then heal it with other cures until it is well.
And if the blood flows from the wound, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes help in all the aforementioned arrangements: namely, at the flow of blood and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should either tie or lead with a string of leather, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair grows on the head of the penis that has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an ulcer, then it is appropriate to scrape it with one instrument until all the ties are released and the head of the penis is free.
And if this is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with a spatumile at the root of the penis and the skin; then carefully remove it between one and two inches, and place a thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water on it, so that it does not scar.
of circumcision
is not dislocation if it is done properly like the other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary to do it well and lightly for the sake of salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcisio of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only those whom we have acquired by experience.
For I have heard the most part of the masters and the wise men who did circumcision under the navel, and for strength, and for all a new wonder; so was it done that he might not touch that which is above and delay that which is below.
Or if it is uncovered again, and the pain is double, and the cleansing which is from the navel is not assured to the point of the member; and by chance the nail escapes the iron, and corrupts the work, and often there are born so that there is no need of cleansing, and I have wanted it.
Of the cleansing which is made for strength to all the thread of the line I have found the goodness of experience, for the strengths cut out rightly as well above as below.
Car when you press your hand, if they are cut evenly at 12 inches long; but the thread should be well-woven around the leather; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think that you do not make him tie the thread tightly around the shaft so much, and then cause him to wait in all ways that you can. Then make the thread rest between your hands straight, and tie the forces between your hands where the nail goes in, neither of the tools; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or hit, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie another 12 inches of yarn; and hold it by the second loop to the thumb and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the top of the head.
Then make the thread rest between your hands straight, and tie the forces between your hands where the nail goes in, neither of the tools; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or hit, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie another 12 inches of yarn; and hold it by the second loop to the thumb and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the top of the head. Then let the blood run a little and a little, for it is bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder - a drape of glue made from an egg white that has been boiled and diluted with rose water, mixed with oil of roses and freesia, and leave it there until the next day, and the doctor will cure it if it remains unwell.
The form of forces for cleaning is this: the two joints should be soft and cut, and the joints should also be as long as the hand.
Here is the translation of the text line by line:
If it has passed three days and that which is dislocated in the root of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess of the skin is calmed down and the scab is slightly taken off; then wrap it up as well as you can, and keep away from the part of the penis, for this will not harm him.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Dou retentement de l'urine si est quant li cuve s’en va par la venes; et si il s’en va par petite chose, se covient que tu tiens li cuve par petite chose qui pouveit le faire sortir, si com on a dit plus avant.
The reten of urine is of an operation of stone, or of frozen blood, or of bowels, or of horses, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
And if the urine is not relieved, and you see the retention for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and let the feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as much as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder toward the removal of the stone from above, because the urine is relieved.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with all the instrument which is called "siringue", of which this is the form: and let it be of fine lightweight silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cane be of a palm long and a half, and let it be sharp at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take .i. double thread, and tie it to the tip of a piece of wool or cotton, and bottle the tip of the thread inside the siringue; and fill the surplus of the wool and the bottle up to the tip of the siringue, then apply oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the urethra with moistened oil and olive oil and water;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And then begin again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and let the patient be even.
For diseases of the bladder:
When bladders are burned or sore, and you see water and medicine in it, then make the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if a 1/3rd hole: 1/2nd from one side, and 1/4th from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow long by which the medicine can be well removed without adding anything, if we can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
and when you see the medicines going into the bladder, put the chief of the scalp in the moisture, and draw with it while pulling, which will draw out the moisture to the scalp, and then push hard at the pull; if the moisture goes in, and now comes to the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the shape of the subtle clister which we use for the bladder: if so:
And it is of silver or wood, and the head is higher; and take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture which you see clisterizing the bladder in it, then tie it together with a double thread of good thread, and heat the moisture coming out of the bladder on the fire; then put the chief of the clister in the bladder, then draw your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into .i. a circle, and pierce it around; then put in .i. a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle together as one would join .i. a door, and put inside what you wish for oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have already spoken about the division of stone into parts and their extraction together with medicines; and I have also mentioned the difference between a stone that is hard and one that is soft, and how to size stones; and regarding the bladder and the womb, I will explain both clearly and concisely.
I say that the stone which is hard in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and when it opens, it softens the patient's womb and makes it move many times, and then becomes hardened again; and the foundations of it are washed away; and it is lighter for those who are between infancy and maturity until they reach 20 years old, and heavier for those who are past middle age, and milder for those who have small stones than for those who have large ones.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary to purify the patient first by enema, in order to drain all the bile which is in the intestines. For it is not appropriate at any time to seek stones.
Then take the patient by the feet and move them to defecate, so that the stone comes out completely from the bladder, and never go up from its place; then make him sit between your hands, and his hands are dislocated from his thighs, so that the bladder is all downhill; then examine and touch it from within.
If you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut it on the stone. And if it does not move when touched from all sides, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and complete; then press it at its base, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, so that the amine is at the neck of the bladder; then press with your two fingers, and bottle it up to defecate where you see it being cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extends with his right hand the coions above, and with his left hand holds back the skin which is over the coions in the part where one cuts; then pour the spermatic fluid copious, from which it is this form:
And set between those who are between the hip bones and the pelvis, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side of the waist; and be right on the stone, and your two should be together or to the pelvis, and be the size of the traver so that it is wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Now and then the press if there is such a thing as a pelvis, that it does not work hard; and know that there is a part of stone where there are angles and edges: let it go out; and if there is a part that is soft, like a flower, and round, whose issue is light.
So that if it is soft where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not go out, then you must hold it with tweezers that are like a file on the head; or pull it out with a small sharp tool. If you cannot do this, then open it with a knife and cut off the tip.
And if there is more than one stone, first pull out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then grind it down, and the smaller ones after if there are any. And if it is very large, then cut it so that it comes out easily; for 10 things come to the patient: either he dies, or his urine flows freely because his bladder does not close; but you must try to pull it out or cut it into pieces with tweezers.
and when you have finished your work, if the wound is hot, apply aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly with a wet cloth, dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then tie up the patient's neck with a knot for three days.
And when you remove it, if it is well oiled with oil and water, then treat the wound with afininicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if it is held by this way so that the urine is not passed in one way that it is lost with the blood: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the blood, because if it remains, it will freeze the bladder, and let it out.
and then lift the wound with water and sand and earth, and assist it in all ways that you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that you tie the legs together, and gather the remedies on top of them.
And if the stone is small, and it is where he is conducted from the penis, and fixed in there, and the urine cannot go out; if the cure of this, that I have said above, that you cut him many times, is on excuses from cutting by this cure. I have already tried thus.
Take in the iron according to this form and be at three angles fixed in one beam:
Then take a file and put it inside the penis at the base of the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then tap the file lightly against the stone in the penis; and turn the file from side to side, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another angle; if then soon comes the urine, then press your hand on what is delayed outside the stone which is inside the penis. If it suddenly breaks, and jumps out with the urine, and heals the patient;
And if the urine can come out by this stone or by another part, and comes to the penis, then let it go: but if it can come out by another part than the penis, then is the stone broken, and jumps with the urine. If you can pierce the stone from another part besides the penis, then is it broken; and if you pierce the urine inside the stone which is in the penis, and comes out through the stone; then is it delayed. And if you cannot do this by any means so that it harms him, then take 1/4 of an inch file from the stone and 1/4 of an inch from above, then make the incision at the base of the stone between the two lines, and extract it strongly, and wash out the frozen blood which is in the wound; and cure as long as it is healthy.
of the stone of women
There shall come a time when stone is found in women, and if it ever comes, there is great grief, and it is defended by 3 things: the first is that peradventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well skilled who reveals herself to the mirror, even though she is married.
And the third way is that peradventure one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of the man, because it covers to make a deeper cut, and has great fear.
And if necessary, if you can find a wise woman, and if not, then don't worry. Seek out 1. a wise woman who knows all of the art; and the present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to make that which you command of the investigation of the stone;
and look well that his wife is a virgin: then it is appropriate for him to put out his right hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she makes it true, if she binds her right hand, and he recommends that she puts out her right hand with the disease, and wants and presses his left hand on the bladder form.
If she makes it true, that it is appropriate for her to move it from the entry of the bladder to the root, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then put your hand on the stone in the middle of the limb, where it is cut off, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his right hand from the stone or root, and make the first small incision;
then put your hand on the stone in the middle of the limb, where it is cut off, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his right hand from the stone or root, and make the first small incision; then blow the wound dry, if you feel the stone so deep into the wound that the stone can come out again, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain. If you know the appearance, then know the outcome."
And if it does not come out, then put vinegar in the wound, and hold it for an hour until the stone is completely removed; then return to your work, until the stone is completely out, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone ready to help you with your work;
and if you go without it, and this is the artery that is severed, then put the powder on the spot and squeeze out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the veins have closed, if you return to your work, then let the stone be far away.
of hernial hernia
of the hernia
And the generation of this ramose stuff is so feeble that it comes to union, and expands that matter.
And so it comes to union by impact on the joints, and this moisture is of many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and it happens more.
And these are the signs of distended things: for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscesses are tender, .i. short and like the shape of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then the abscesses are tender with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syfac, so he feels good; so when you see to know the color of the moisture, then try all of the inner part because its shape is before. According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge who is inside.
According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge who is inside. And when we cure it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and cover him with drapes; and let there be no light but the light of the moon.
and then sit on his left side, and command the minister that he sits on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs of the chest of the testicles; and let there be no light but the light of the moon.
Take then the spit-mule, and cut off the skin of the cow among him long until the end of the loins, and so your sawing all straight in cutting off the skin of the cow until the white syfac, and the scorch lightly according to the will.
Then pierce the syfac plain of water at 1 . large opening, and draw all the water out, and then put your spats on, and raise the syfac up; and do not touch the hair of the cow, but only scorch it lightly; cut all or in pieces separately the cost of him finely, so that if you don't cut it well with a sharp edge, the water will return;
And if the spitting was for your work, so that you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syfac; then join the 21 skin pieces of the cow's hair at a seam, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the spitting corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you lay the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the corruption of blood; then cut the cow's hair at all the suspension, and draw out the spitting, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is mixed in two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then cover the other part with it as you did the first, and wash away the blood, and put another wet one on the wound.
and put another wet one on the two branches, and put felt pads on top of them, and wrap up all the length with this form:
Then take two felt pads, and make them of wool according to this shape and join them by stitching in the girdle of the shirt, and one of the shoulders hangs down to the back, and the other to the shoulder part; and the other two hang over the two arms, and are all joined together in the loop of the shirt;
and there is no need to use medicine of this chapter in place of a iron ring, and it is necessary to take a thin surgical knife, and heat it as we have said, so that the white medicine that contains the water is uncovered;
If you use fire cautery according to this form, and pierce it like a snake, and scorch it with this fine fire cautery:
And dip it in all the ways that you can, until you drain everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the bone; and know that this work is safer; and move with caution to avoid blood loss, and move with care so as not to harm the cuts.
and if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess or blood loss or any other thing, then treat what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
and if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then let it be pierced as we told you before, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have said that the snake's bite is poisonous,
If he is sitting, lift him up; then pierce the apophelis in the part of the loins to all the wide spasmile, and place the piercing long of the body; and make the orifices large so that all the water runs out.
Then put cotton on the place, and bandage it, and leave so that the rest of the water runs out, then heal him until the wound is healed;
and do not let the water run out into the mouth of the wound, but it is good that you put a feather or an instrument used to drain the water from the dropsy, so that it takes shape as above; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or more, and when it is gathered, as before, and in this way the patient will be healed within his days.
of the apophelis of the loins
That said, in this chapter of the book there are many fears; therefore I believe that it is better to let it be.
And I will tell you the work and appearance of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the horns, and most often from the joints; and this is by much chance.
This is to know: through excess sour bile and water that is spread in the joints, or from impact; or
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the bone; and does not ache, and is an abscess full of pain;
and sometimes is a painful and piercing abscess, and of a pale color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling in the leg.
When it is from a vein, if you place your fingers on it gently; and only comes when you touch it.
What is made of the seeding of wool is known by its disposition to the expression of touch on the two.
and he can do very well with this treatment, and with other things, in terms of size; and is that you clean the curd from the cheese, then put the wool on top, and treat it with white of an egg, and deliver the suspension on all sides of the wool.
If the wool has already been soaked in this way with these new cheesecloths, so it is convenient that you then take the wool and the curd.
and if it is air-dried with the medicine, or in those who are inside the vessels, then you must deliver all of what is held, and the cup rings around.
And if the birth of the lamb is behind him, then you must kop it all, and take out the uvula, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, take wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, and then apply other remedies until it is healed.
of the aposteme of the cations
This is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: and the patient grumbles when he goes;
and the treatment for this disease is very similar to that mentioned above;
and we will tell you the work of it, according to those who did so in ancient times;
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on .i. an easing seat, then pour the suspension of the cowries down your throat. to all the vessel that are near to the penis, and make them form and extend.
then chop with a sharp knife at the root of each vessel, until they are uncovered.
and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then I stick a needle where it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first place where its sight has come, and tie it quickly to the other head; Then put on a cloak in the middle right, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture;
Then heal the wound as you would with other bowels, so that no vassal cries out because of pain when he defecates;
For by this there comes no harm, and all the bowels come out, so it is necessary to draw the bowels of all the vassals; and so he does not lose his hair due to the incisions of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the syrup Of the symptoms of this disease if they are due to a section that causes the syrup, or extension along the abdomen in the part of the anus, so that the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the bowels;
and this rupture is where the syrup, or extension of it, comes from; and these four ways of being caused come from: from impact, jumping, bellowing, lifting a burden, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of the medicine, if it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until almost full, so that the medicine presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the medicine, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses are diverse in appearance, with skin discharge, and this is by the exit of the intestine and the course of the medicine away from the body.
And never does it move around with the intestine, and is held back, and makes great pain for the patient to suffer, even when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron for fear, so it is avoided.
And the method of cauterizing so you order the patient that he keeps the intestine to his hand inside the wound if he can get back in; then be careful on his neck between your hands, and gently pull the cheeks apart;
then extend the tongue out far above the upper teeth, and peel back the skin of the cheeks; then pour into them from the loins down with the needle according to what you need in order to open the wound, and be like this that you can take it out again;
then peel off the skin from the testicles as far as the hair grows, until the white part of the flesh is completely exposed;
then place your second finger in such a way that it follows the shape of the scrotum, in such a way that it goes between the white part that is completely exposed and between the second white part;
and separate what is behind the scrotum, and between the second white part; and then move your left hand towards the back of the testicles, and place the white part at the top of your right hand, and hold the skin of the scrotum towards the navel; and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and from this who is ahead behind the tie;
and examine your two sides if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white as fat hard, and if you do not find anything, then pour into the abdomen desoz;
then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the testicles; then cut the joints that appear of the threads, until there are .iiij. threads; then put together one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is desoz the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of .ij. parts; and then wrap the heads of the files, and join them together with .ij parts, so that no vassals who feed them may enter in to us, because an abscess does not come; and put the thread thereof carefully according to the first long .ij. of that, and after these .ij. threads leave a space which is two fingers wide between the two threads, and after these two threads leave a space which is as large as a finger's width between the two threads;
and after all the others according to the length that the thread of the horse carries; and then sew in the part which is between the leather of the coins, so that it does not sag, and the bow, as we have said above;
and then bring wet wool in oil, and put it in the wounds, and this thread which we have spoken of above. And there is no fire cautery of white lead that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of blood loss.
For this often happens, and he leaves the ligature as long as it cries out for him; and if it delays in crying, let it be raised by warm water, and put on what we have said, as long as it cries.
then heal the wound with other cures until it is completely healed.
from a hernia
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to attempt the cure with fire.
And the old one said that it is made like this: as you tie the strings together in a bundle, after cutting them slightly on one side of the limb; and
then tie it tightly with a thong, and cure the abscess from this one who is affected, as long as the strings are leaking; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
No time comes without a wound, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not let any of the bowels come out, and if some do come out, it is little, and repair every hour; and
and wherever it stays too long at this point, believes the wound or pus until the intestines come out.
and where there is extension of pus which is in the grooves, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and open.
and the cure if it is by cauterizing, as we have said before; and it is never cured with fire in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then place the cauterizer at the edge of the wound according to the quantity of 2/3:
and then pull out the medicine which is behind the skin that follows, and then take the ring and put it on the apparent place of the medicine;
and then press to perfection on the belly, then cut the .ij. apparent places of the medicine on top of the ring, and cut one and the other;
and then pull out the ring, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, as I told you in the cure of the ramose intestines;
and then treat with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the threads, if the wound is healed, as long as it is healthy.
The medicines are constipating, and have no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is soft in this place, and more nearby to save.
of softening the leather of the skin
Several times the leather of the skin is softened in certain men, for since the hairs that are within are softened, it may be seen; and it is necessary, when one cleans him, to put the leech on his back, and to soften the leather which is natural; then join the 11 lips together with one stitch or 21 tightly; then cover between the stitches, and treat him as for other wounds, until he is healed, and cut the thread.
with fire
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Here is the text translated into English:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
of the snake
Of the snake: Tentigene is a char placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has as great a hand on it as a man, and it is the cure. You should take the surplus of the tentigene to your hand or toes, and cut it lightly; and do not cut it too completely, lest blood come, then cure it with another cure until it is well; and at another char that is born in the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps jump off, and it is according to its appearance a cow disease, and for this they called it the "old cow disease". If you cut it, as we have said of the tentigene, and cure it until it is well.
of the errant
Of the errant: Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as  .ij leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez. Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancریت qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Many ways of treating an abscess can arise in the breast, as in Chancre and pustular abscesses, herpes and esthiomes, fistulas and hemorrhoids, and pustular abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is therefore necessary that in this treatise I should explain how to treat a pustular abscess that arises in the breast, which is not like an abscess that is deep; and if you know the art of iron, then note that if an abscess is hot at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die as long as the pain is relieved; and then place the sick person on a chair, and put three small chairs under him where he leans, and support his legs with his hands and join them well with a good bond; and then suck his bile towards his left ribcage, and introduce the instrument by which one treats the mouth of an abscess, from which comes its form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you put a finger first to check the depth of the abscess, so that what enters the instrument does not come in more deeply than it should and do no harm to the sick person; and if the instrument is large, then cover the depth of the abscess with linen fabric so that the instrument does not cause any discomfort; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and darken the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and his hand becomes soft, then cover it with a cloth, leading to the main part; and when the bowels are emptied, then you must place in the wound wet tents made of oil or green dry oil; and put the tent outside the wound at the depth of the breast, and place them on both sides of the wound and under the other hand, wet with water or boiled roses; then let him continue to treat for two days after the poultice has come out, until he is healed; and do not raise the breast and the wound by using a hot water and honey douche, and then only use hot water or roots of lillies and aristolochia long cooked. Then remind him to treat again. And if the wound heals in the breast, then you should guard against treating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
Here is the translated text:
If the baby is stuck to her mother's breast by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtue of milk is weak, then she should sit upon a saddle or the woman should hold it; and make her fat oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the broth between her two breasts from which this form comes. If the baby is stuck to her mother's breast by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the milk is weak, then she should sit upon a saddle or the woman should hold it; and make her cook oil or fenugreek, and then pour the broth between her two breasts from which this form comes. And split the second one, and chop off her fingernails as much as the moisture that is in them runs out; and grab the woman's belly as much as the baby drops, and if it doesn't drop, then it is necessary to make the woman drink fenugreek musk with oil of sesame; then let her grab and shake it, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: so now the baby. If the hands come out strong, then it is necessary to pull them gently little by little; and if they cannot come in, then put the woman on .i. seat, and make her lift her feet up; then take down the seat from the ground, and rub her, that she does not stand up; and if the hands cannot come in, and the baby dies, then chop off her hands with the knife that is before placed, and pull out the child, and do it equally.
of the baby's birth on its feet When a child falls on its feet, so it comes to put up there. and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
and then stretch the feet and extend them little by little.
When it jumps just as the feet are stretched, so he commands to stretch it, and makes it tremble with fear; if you jump, God help you.
and if it does not happen as we have said, little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be lighter.
and if it does not happen as we have said, take muscillaige of alyssum, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar; and place on top of nature of woman inside and away this ointment, then put her sit in water bath until it is soft the ribs;
and when she is moistened soft, then put her .i. necklace of myrrh, and leaves it, and leaves for an hour; then put her sit on .i. seat, then make her shake and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, because the baby is now jumping. of the birth of the child on its knees When the child comes in this form, if I put the ball in his hands little by little;
of the exit of the child who comes out wide a hand during It is necessary to take care to bring back the hand: Here is the translation of the provided text:
If she cannot walk, then have her sit up in bed and stretch out her legs straight."
Then provide the muscle relief that I have described;"
and if she is not pregnant, then have her sit on a chair, and then study how to reduce the hand;"The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. and warm the child according to the natural form, and its doing is to tremble, and it is ordered that she warm while the baby is away.
of the child's exit on his neck, and spread his hands, and his face turns towards her mother's back then take hold of his hand, then turn it in and out slightly, and gently warm it up;
and when he is even, then put on top of the natural muslin cloth and oil, as we have said before, and instruct her to move slightly;
and when you have done this, if the fire sits on .i. seat, and he orders that it is warmed; and the fire shakes. of this same manner in all the second part
of this same manner in all the second part When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you cut off the second knuckle, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if it is pinned to its face and to its neck, so that it copes with the water, not being held back, and the prisoner dies;
Then pour the child inside, as you have done so far, and instruct the woman that she do not bathe.
of the twins' exit. Says that twins are often born, and only once a twin is born; and this is not an unusual thing, and such things sometimes happen. Two are strange things, and do not live, if name alone.
I know who, that they may be multiplied, and are denied by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the fire;
and never happen naturally as we all do, as we have said.
And if they hurt, so the cure, as we have said, and the subtle doctor, and quickly and lightly do what she does; and make such as it deserves for salvation. of many children
of many children No time is wasted in the formation of the marris i.e. or iij or iiij or vj or vij etc. up to xv, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
and cover so that the bailer knows everything, for by chance similar things might come about; If you do this according to what is right.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman whose child has died in her womb, as I said in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are constrained to use your hands; if you know that the woman is of sound health, and has not had any accidents or fears of death;
If it is necessary for the woman to be supported on her back, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised up.
and the minister to touch it with oil from .i. parts, or she be laid in bed so that she is not treated for the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with oil from alfalfa and sesame seeds, and with musk and castor oil; then anoint her hands with these oils and these muskillaiges; then pour into the mouth of the woman slightly, then hold it there while she swallows; then pour into her mouth three drops or so,
and take care so that he does not fall off, that he goes down on his head; if the arrow enters into the hair or into the neck or into the mouth or into the throat or near the ribs or in the jaw or under the chin;
and if it falls to the ground, he should pick it up and touch it with his hand; and if he pricks himself, he should hold it back; and if he hits him on the side, he should not move;
and it is necessary that he hold the arrow in his right hand, and place the bow between his two left hands, and lightly pull the arrow with his right hand, and insert the arrow into any of the places we have mentioned, until it comes out empty;
then put against .I. another onyx, or the tier so that extractions are equal;
and then extend it evenly in moving from one side to the other, so that they come out, and the onyx teeth are held in place, as this is the form:
And if one part stops, so anoint it with oil on both sides, and push it in that part, and draw the other party;
and if there is no delay at all, then put it this way or higher place, and do that as long as it comes out all at once.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the tightness, If it is necessary that you wrap him up with a cloth, as long as he comes out all at once;
Then wrap the cloth around the joint of the foot or the knee, and in the other hand, do the same thing with the other foot.
And if the child's head is large and he is stuck in the birth canal, or his head is acute and assembled, If it's necessary that you squeeze the spine-spitted between your two hands, and force the head and pull out the acute one; or you hold it with the instrument that is called "almidah", from which the form comes with the instruments or ointment that follows this one;
and thus himself makes the child' head very acute naturally; and then cut the bones with shears,
and then he pulls out the shoulder bone with force, if it is broken, until the moisture that is there comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces so you can eat it.
and if it is swollen in the belly or comes out from the sides, then pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if he falls on his feet, then is the slight traction, and we bring them to the mouth of the mare's milking.
If he is dislocated at the belly or breast, then cover with a cloth wrapped over your hand; and press the belly or breast, as much as the moisture that comes out;
and if another member is dislocated and the head remains in place, If the bucket is full of water from the well, and brings it up to the mouth of the well; Then pour in one-quarter of a pint of wine, and stir it well; then drink it up all at once, and do not stop;
and if the mouth of the well is contracted by a hot liquid that has come to it, so that it cannot be used, then you must not disturb it. there are certain things that should not be eaten with this water, such as greasy or moist food; and they are administered with plasters, and cut with sharp and moistening tools.
And if it is stuck to his collarbone, and you can put it in line, then administer what we have said about the live child;
and if one does not have the power, then let him be cut into pieces, and nothing of the second shall be left.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said about the warm feet that come from the mare's milk;
and if blood flow occurs, if it is put in water restringing, and other cures are administered.
And I saw a woman whose womb had been torn open, one was dead then counselled another, and rejected the others. After a long time the wound began to heal, and it healed greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long, and could not stop the wound.
I put on plaster of great attraction, and there put an arm, and after a few days another. I marveled much, for this belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to see the wound, and with my hands I took out the bones, as long as the woman was in better shape; and wait for the woman long ten hours, and it was stuck a little bow out of place;
and I do not remember this paste before that because when the master tries an strange thing, he knows how to put help.
to bring back the married woman to her place
Here comes the form of the pressure, with which we weigh the books; and at .ij. turns to .ij. shoulders of .ij. limbs. However, the horns shall be more delicate than the girdle, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and let it have a mouth two inches wide, and the tree edge two inches wide, and a length of one palm and a half; and the six inches be made of two supports from this same wood, which are joined together on one side, with a length of half a palm or a little more;
and the two supports are set in the mouth of the mask so that they open when the horns are turned;
Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the claws; and has .ij. chisels and .ij. tools, so that you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you open the jaw with all the instrument, so that the woman sits on .ij. beds, legs spread and feet out; then put the .ij. chisels together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees; And then work your hand on all the instrument, as you did with the claws evenly, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the mare, until the ball moves this way and that.
This instrument is all raised up, and it has many similarities; and when you see them put together, the work is quicker and higher for their quantity.
If you do not prepare the instrument beforehand, it cannot be excused because of its need.
When the second one is restrained at birth, it is necessary that you command to the patient that she retires her tongue, and then makes it gag with cold water, and draws your hands to the mouth and nose; and if it falls because of rain, it is good.
and if not, it is good. If it does, he puts a covering or lid, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, as calamus, rut, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury;
all these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or simmered in water over the fire; then put a strap or lid on the pot, and the other one at the mouth of the wound,
and let the vapor rise inside the wound; then make it sweat, as we have said. If a second operation is done. And if it remains after this cure and is not well, instruct the balia to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or musk-root, and then pour it into nature,
and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she grabs it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the marriage does not break at the extraction; but then move it lightly from side to side, and then tie it; if she comes and undoes herself.
And if the mouth of the wound is wide open, we have said the cure for sneezing, and for inhaling herbs smoke;
and if it does not cause any of what we have said, be careful so that you do not follow the advice of those who treat with cow's milk;
but it is necessary that the one who has a wound in his mouth, you lay him on the lap of the woman, and then cauterize with four-part oil;
if it will not heal, and then will come again; but nevertheless, when it has put on a bad smell in the stomach and in the head, and blisters the patient.
If it is necessary, then there are suitable fumigations for this: no one has tried fumigation with nettle and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which one smokes the woman during the retention of the flowers and the second if this is so:
And it is like to see a snake, and put the thin head in the place, and wide shoulders above the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the smoke until it is spent, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but a subtle and skilled physician will stop them with a sharp knife. If it is convenient to pierce the foundation that the skilled physician has at his disposal, and he does not pierce it with a sharp knife, and binds up the wound so that it does not touch,
and if one wants to pierce the other skilled physician's finger, and does not boil it or scold it, but hears it say that it is good to pierce;
And if you doubt that it will not return, put a stick in his hand and leave his hands open, and be careful when he walks to go upstairs.
And there is no time for the sudden return of the wound or abscess; if it comes to cover suddenly: if it is cured, as we said about the stick.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult and painful; those that come from the base of the finger or in the space between the iji parts,
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
and no longer are these fistulas persistent; and they are known by the one who has an ejection or windiness when the patient makes an ejection, and perhaps in a jump.
And if there is a fistula that pierces up to the bladder, and only up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the crotch, and up to the nape of the neck.
And so recognize the fistula persisting to the foundation, and not persisting. and is that you plug your little finger or foundation, and plug a thin needle of brass or iron in the fistula when there is no curvature.
and if it has curvature, if you plug a thin piece of string or, for example, a horsehair, as long as you feel the string or hair on your little finger;
and if you don't feel it, and there is no perforation, discharge, or vision loss, as we have said: If it does not pierce, then you are in a hurry to heal.
And when the fistula is piercing until the bladder or until the conduct of urine, if it does not stop running, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
If it pierces only up to the hip joint of the pelvis, if he tries going up to the place; If there is no twisting and no pain in the entrails, if he has already been there for a while, and there is no medicine or instant remedy;
and in these fistulas persists no cure but work, and the vanity of foolish mirth which they entwine themselves with.
In that which is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for health by fire, as I have experienced, so
and let the patient lie between your hands on his back; and let him raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be bent towards his stomach; so then pour water into an ark or bucket if there is any curvature, until you know that the ark comes;
If the patient feels pain in his foot, then you should put your index finger there.
He will feel the pin prick; and if you cover or uncover it between your thumb and index finger, then you know that it is painful; If it does not cause any pain, then it cannot be cured.
All things have their remedies, but some are difficult to cure; however, with the right treatment, they can be cured.
and the aid which one makes, if it is that one warms up the fire-cautery according to the largeness of the fistula, as has been said before; and dip all hot in the fistula, until it comes off easily from the bottom; and do this .ij. times or .iij., until you know that these feathers which are made like an owl's feather are burned; who,
and then dip the tent-curtains in water and burn them, until that feather falls off, and then patch it with an ointment, wrapping up the feather and mending it.
If it is thus healed, it is good. But if not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if it attempts to go in, and does not pierce until the tip which is at the foundation, and between your two fingers put a thick covering of tar or of resin, and you see the fistula at those who support the covering from below; if the covering of the beginning of the fistula, and is pressed together before the tent, and then cauterize after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
and the tent will be delivered, and shall be cured; then take those tar-covered ones that seem like an owl's feather, and there is none remaining.
And if you go without, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with medicinal broth.
For fire cauterizes 1.2 bones things: that is to say, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood, and the removal of moisture.
and then the doctor of wet tents bakes or dries them in a dry place, until the leather softens, and sets fire to the joints while they are still soft.
and then treat the wound with dry herbs that burn easily in hard wood, and the medicines are dried up.
For once it is restored, it is healed and does not come back again.
And if a fistula comes up just short of the foundation, and is distant from the heart, you will draw it back to the foundation, and probe it.
If you feel the tendency, and between iij is the thread or the cord or the chain, or it is ready to break, there should only be a way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the iii. ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you chop it just short of the root, or if you can't, then probe it gently as a first cure;
and don't go too deep, so you don't chop the root, and let the excretion come out by the voluntary way; Then the physician, as we have said;
Then the physician, as we have said; if he is getting better, then remove that covering and clean it up well from its base, or with a cloth or any other instrument; then cut off this hair which is in the wound, as well as you can;
then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the foundation: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And there is no opening of a fistula according to this method; and it is when you plug the tent into the fistula, and it is where it is or from the bottom of the leather on top, if one takes a tent hole at the top according to this form: And I pour a.i. thread into iij., and plug the tent into the fistula all the way up as much as possible.
If it persists in the margin inside, then remove the thread from that hole, so that you plug your two or fundament;
and tie the head to the staff, and join together the .ij. shoulders together, and separate them from each other, and leave it for one day or .ij. days;
and do not restrain it at any time, until the staff touches the shoulders that are between two, and they rub;
then heal the wound as long as it is forged and healed.
If the fistula does not penetrate, if you pierce it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too perfectly enclosed.
For he is not fit to do this operation if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the spikelet from which one makes a tube is sharp, and when cut with an edge it splits in two, and carves; and on the other hand, not, because one does not fit to do this operation if one is not fit to do it, as you see here:
Here is the translation of the text: "And when there is one or more, they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are far have little moisture,"
"And then cut them with a little yellow water or a little blood, and their color is that of the flesh;"
"And the cure for those who have them deep in the foundation is that you command the patient to sweat by applying heat to the feet until the foundation is removed and the fluid comes out;" If you hurry, and hold it like a claw, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut off its roots.
and if the ligature cannot hold them due to moisture, take it from a scarf, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and hold them with your two hands, then cut them off, and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire's place; or you may cauterize them as it is said or with a cautery paste, then cure them with other cures until they are well;
and if the foundation cannot be extracted, then cauterize the patient with a hot cautery and sharp so that it washes out what is in the foundation, so that it can be extracted freely;
Now if the disease is pressing on the patient, and its roots are deeply rooted in the foundation, then the treatment is easy; and you should press them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are cured, and do not incise them with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then tie the thread at the top of the needle, and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread over the needle, and if it is a large one; then pull the thread up, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one.i. to draw out the excess blood;
then put on the foundation.i. dampen it in oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest;
and then leave it until it is healing, and when it has healed, if he cures with ointment and other cures, until he is well.
on the foundation itself; Several times there is drying up of the ends in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
If you should scrape the bark off a tree or your nail, which does not allow it to moisten; then heal it as long as it is sore, so that it may be well;
and if it cannot be healed, then shave it more vigorously than before, until it bleeds and is scorched; And then treat him until he is well.
he fidgets is a small appearance before the neck, and goes very well with it.
and it never breaks the skin, and you can feel it as if you were dead, and goes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is such that you take a feather from an goose, or a feather from a strong vulture, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle completely covers the wound. Then turn your hand to all the feather as you cover the whole wound, and put it on completely, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if you see, make a cut of a feather of air or iron according to this form, and be subtle and draw it across:
Do not pierce, so that you may hold the two together, and press: And if you see, cauterize the wound, as it is before or of the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clister No clister made of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or brass; and no instrument of any size is appropriate, but only those for which it has been prepared.
These, then, are the ones that are brought for the care of infants and weak or painful things, and are small.
The shape of the clister should be small and large if it is over the breast, or tied according to this manner:
and I have a distention where the belly is tied up, so that you see it, and the ribs are pierced on one side, and in the other 1.8;
and let the belly be massaged with oil of beans or parchment, and be pierced all around the small perforations;
and let there be 1.8 inches of space between each perforation, then insert a strong wire mesh into these perforations and join the belly together as if it were a deer; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies before a strong wire, then cauterize it; and it takes the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive or of almond nut or some other thing, then pour it lightly.
then have the ministers spread it on his head with their two hands together until it is completely coated, then remove the cloth, and hold the patient's legs against the wall,
and let the medicine remain on him as long as he can tolerate it; and if he sleeps all night, that is greater aid.
and if you cauterize him for a disease of the belly that comes on gradually, and let the medicine remain on him until he is well.
And if hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, so is the clistere also very small like a child;
and this is the form of the clistere which is very small where the skin is tightened:
of wounds
We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures of hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of this they are made.
The things for which wounds are made are by a blow of stone, and by a sword and knife, or a cock's beak, or a lance or spear or axe or scythe or similar things;
or that are made by the blows of a horse's hoof, or of a whip, or of a staff, or of a hammer, or of a mallet, or of a similar object; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, since the reminder will come in my chapter on this topic.
I say that when a simple wound occurs where the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about the incision of an abscess: if it does not cause great pain to the head immediately after the blood has come from the wound, and it hurts in the opposite direction from the part that was injured;
and the patient's appetite for wine and fatty foods is lost.
And if he does not salivate, if his meat is not increased, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese.
and over the wound, if there is an abscess, cotton wet with oil soak up, or wine stiptic;
and if there is no abscess, if it is fresh all over the body, and does not move with air, powder, which I will say a little hereafter;
and if it has been moved, if it is placed on some onions, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by sutures, if they are joined by stitching, as I will say about wounds from the belly, from the seam.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and dries up quickly, then cure the wound with medicine and restore it with hard leather instead of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large, cooked meats such as testicles and wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
And if you find rot on the leather, and it doesn't touch the bone, then cut it all off, and throw it away, and then cure it.
And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and he cannot stop the bleeding with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it up like a knot. and if he does not benefit from it, then cautery him.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 3 parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and hold it firmly, until it is well healed and joins together all its blood;
and then put it well, and leave it not tied up if it does not swell, for we do not remove the medicine as long as it is healthy.
And never make a cast of salt when you have the resin or dragon's blood, but let the arm not move the wound.
And if the arm has moved the wound, nevertheless it is necessary to put on this powder, otherwise
but put on some digestives oils or flour of barley made with water and honey, as long as it is still wet; and the doctor prescribes other remedies until he is well.
And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound at the throat
If the wound comes from the throat and is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the wound is in the neck where the artery is cut.
If it is the neck, if there is no other impediment to the cure, and do not put anything restricting, for this hinders the healing of the neck and makes it retreat. and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its extension with the brain, which is the highest limb;
but if the medicine is hot, like warm water mixed with rosewater and oil, and also cooked water; and other stones of my own according to this way, and wetting oils.
If the wound is large, if the cut requires binding, then heal it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the animal is full of bowels and blood;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, if the fever and the loins and the cauterization are done;
and if the throat is blocked, so that the food does not go down, and the windpipe is closed, if the food gets stuck in the throat, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape; and then let it rest for a few days, and then treat it with garlic until it is well;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then examine it; and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't bear it all, and what you cannot bear, leave it until the wound pus and be careful and rigid about the discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder that I mentioned on it. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as described in my chapter onchapstick.
of the wound from a spear or a sword
If it's from a spear or a sword, and the wound is deep, then check the patient's breath to see if they are still alive: know that such a wound is deadly.
and if the wound isn't deep and is still fresh, then in the first hour don' t apply powder, nor tie it up so that the patient doesn' t die perfectly: and turn to face the patient, and take a breath yourself. but I feel a tingling sensation, and it lies there .ij. times a day;
and if you do not feel any pain, put in the wound cotton wet with vinegar to absorb the moisture,
and let the patient lie on the wound .ij. times, or .iiij., or more often; if there is no spasm, nor a strange trembling of the heart due to pain; and when you see the good arrangements, know that the wound is saved. Heal the wounds of tents and other things, as long as he is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and if it bursts, know that there is a fistula; and if the cure is done as it should be.
And if the wound is from a knife or a sword, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, if the cure of this one;
Here is the translation of the text line by line: and if they are not infected, then let the wound rot, and then bring the extractions.
and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
and the rupture of the womb
The rupture of the belly is great and small and little.
from a great wound there often springs none of the intestines, or from the innards, through which enters the efflux of blood;
and the stitch is more painful, and never lessens the small wound than the great one;
For thus do we not put the intestines back in place, if we do not put them back in turn from warm to warm; for so that the intestines swell until they feel cold, if return more to the needles,
and so it hurts that the pain is great, and remain so in the needles, for I keep the intestine in its place than others .ij.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
the .ij. common sutures have in the suture of the belly,
and he sews up the other wounds of the chest and .ij. other common sutures are equal to those of others;
and each is more proper with the sewing of the belly, and I will say each and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine outside, and good thing is to treat it, this is by one of the .ij. ways: Here is the translation of the provided text: or because the intestines are swollen by the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in a certain way: Soak a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water, then wring it out slightly, Here is the translation of the text: and raise the intestine as much as it swells until it is osted;
and no time does this vin restraining, and is muder than a soul for disinfling.
And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or salt and cook them well, for by this the entrance to a little thing is blocked;
and if it cannot enter, then cut a little hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to moisten it so that it heals; so we do not have to cut it unless there is great need;
and this is the instrument for breaking:
if you cut it in the hollow and not on the outside, and see the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out, if you reset it according to its natural shape in its own place, If you can, for this is of great value.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, so that the patient lies on his back, and sets his legs higher than his head, and if it's in the part of the soul the belly,
and also if the belly is torn in one of the two parts, if the part that is torn is higher than the other part,
and so one must treat what I say here about large wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, however, you should
then take two hands minister pitously that covers all the wound with his hand, and bring together the lips, and this is the common way of sewing.
and this is the common way of sewing. and you must twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two inches at the head of the wound, and insert a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the two joints of the shoulder with the two joints of the thumb,
then strain a double thread through the needle from both sides; and assemble the 20 joints of the hip together in the following order;
and then leaves .i. two of space, and he sticks another needle; then lay down the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need with the needles, as long as all the wound is closed.
and let the needles grow soft, between small and large. because the fine needles will fill all the space, and the very large ones cannot enter well. For this reason it is necessary that they be soft.
and do not put the needles too far from the hair and leather,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;
and then chop the heads of the nails, so that they do not sting the patient when he sleeps, and I put tents or drapes over the heads of the nails to keep them from moving. and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it needs a needle or .ij.
The second stitch is common, and that you join the .ij. stitches of leather and the .ij. stitches of medicine together with a needle with a strong, flexible thread; and when you have perceived these things together,
and when you have perceived these things together, if we return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you thread a needle;
and put a space of a minor two between each stitch the thickness of a minor two;
this stitch is for the man,
and I sewed an honourable wound where the belly was hurt.
which was wounded by a knife. and the wound was more than a palm in length. and it was from the intestines, three or four palms in length.
and this wound was in the belly. I brought him back his intestine; then it was eight and a quarter hours.
and the wound was sewed up after three weeks, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the miracol was that he did not die, and it was a miracle.
and do not treat it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is no such thing, nor any medicine. and put cotton wool on the wound nine times a day, and rinse it with honey water until it is healed.
Or I will tell you the nine ways to sew up a wound:
take the needle, and thread it from the outside in.
When she perceived the sting of justice in her right eye, if it is the chief pain or cost that you have pricked with the needle
and let her pierce from another part on the inside up to that place;
and let her hear this sound of the stitch, so that you also sew as the skin-peeler skins the fur, and leave the stitch once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second method of sewing, which Galen explains properly,
is this; if it is as if there were a single piece of cloth, which joins the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main pieces to the other main piece in this way:
take an awl or head of the thread closest to the mirror, and pierce it only once, and leave the 17. joints of the shoulder then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside further into the flesh, as 17. joints of the shoulder
then pierce the other from the outside further into the flesh, in the other 17. joints of the shoulder that are opposite to those already pierced, on the other side of the body;
and this is the mode of sewing and the most common.
Galen says thus of this word, and no one testifies against it,
you should sew the abdomen with .ij. needles or thread in each.
and you must put one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with thread.
and know that when the tear is within the belly, then is the stitch more painful than any other type of cut in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as it is with all other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound, so that the fire has moved it, Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
Here is the translation of the provided text into English: and when it has healed over, then put it on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is not open. and when you have cooked it, and your hands are warm, and the scent is pleasant. then treat the wound as you would with others, until it heals.
and if you do not have medicine, put on it, as soon as it begins to go away, cotton wool, and stir it. ij. times a day until it is well.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with the main members, If you want to wet another light thing with hot oil, or with rose oil, and put it between the thighs, and wipe away the testicles.
And if he feels pain or swelling in the balls, and often happens, If the black wine makes him feel uncomfortable, and sometimes it causes pain up to the intestine;
and piercing within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine which is called “young” cannot heal when it is torn, and it is because of the shape of the veins, and because of the subtility of all the body, and the nearness of its nature to that of children.
And if the wound jumps from the skin, put it back as well as the intestine while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turning towards black, then you should place the joint which is black, so that blood does not come from it. for there are veins and arteries;
and then cut who is between the lien; and place the 1/2 joint hanging from the side of the wound to the end in order to extract it when the wound is ready; and the wound above.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some cases,
for I have seen some honourable men wounded or stabbed by a lance;
and this wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became distended and a fistula developed, and there was discharge and wind.
I treated it according to what I knew, and I kept at it until he was well, and I sewed up the wounds.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient had ill will in his belly; and there is no harm done, but delay in better arrangements, and eating and drinking;
and they said that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied in some way: take strips from large testicles, then seal the lips of the wound, and when the strips have opened the mouth, so place it on the iij. lips,
then put on .i. other bandage in this way before, until the wound is completely healed;
and then bind up the wound. If they burn in the intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this thread of intestine that is still attached, and then lay on top of this string .i. string of flax that is thin and twisted, then fill the needle with thread, and sew the intestine, and remove it in a cut;
and this method of sewing with thread is only good according to the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, most especially when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no remedy except for subtlety.
of fistula or which he is Sache that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is called a "fistula" universally. and most commonly when it has been cut and is healing.
And the fistula is according to the verbal form of the nation, hard and white, and there is no pain felt. and is also like the feathers of an owl;
nor once in clear weather, nor another time in thick weather; nor once poked, and another time probed;
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it doesn't matter; is caused by none of the above mentioned things
this is to say, due to small blood or fever; or due to its evil nature; or due to the heat within, and on the lips, that does not allow them to grow; where there is too much bowels; where the loins are rotten, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good for the cure; where by reason that corruption is a manner of plague; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have written extensively on all of these causes and signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
Or it is necessary that I let you know the cure for fistula, which is carried out by hand work.
I see that the fistula occurs in all limbs of the body. For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, or the bowel, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are severe sanitation, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level that I have mentioned, and you have already engaged to cure it, and if you see a clear fistula, whether it is made of iron or steel, if you seek it out,
and if the fistula is twisted, so the search for a thin probe to poke For the dip [of the probe] will be bent due to the twistiness;
and if the fistula is very twisted and you cannot easily search for it with probes, so the cautery [with fire] at one of the openings,
for the moisture is too short a space between one hole and another, and cleanses it.
then cut it to your power, so that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and then shave it completely,
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation of the provided text: and bones were broken and corroded logs that were within them; and then the treatment as long as it is healthy;
and its deep hole is well-centered, if convenient that you cauterize it perfectly, as much as you can, and dip them in medicine water, and pour it up to the top of the fistula.
and dip them in medicine water, and pour it up to the top of the fistula. until the medicine corrodes the excess that is stored at the bottom.
and then dip in olive oil, until it is cured;
and if it is not cured by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
and if the nose is corrupted by the fistula, then the cautery. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
and if the nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so long as the corruption is all bone, then the physician should treat things that are out of place as much as he can make them well;
and if he is not well, and rent bow as before, be careful that you have not gone too far yet:
If you uncover it and look down as far as you can: and restore the joint;
And if he is well here, then it is good. If not, know that corruption is too perfect, so you cannot come there; if there is no other device than to do it by nature;
and if there is a small bone putrid, and you can pull it at the claws, if he is held by an instrument suitable for this.
and if it has one bone, and the tratement of the foot, do not leave any of them;
and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear; if heat and water and wood, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that causes pus. and leave it until the pus fills between the bones,
and then, once the pus has filled the space between the bones,
and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, If you only see as much decay until the blackness is all bone, then mend the wound;
and if there is much decay and comes down to the bone root; if it covers all up to the decay and then mend it until it is solid;
and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man aged .xx. years who had pain in his leg from an inner cause.
As the matter came to the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no cause to open it.
but the mirror due to madness opens so much that it covers the abscesses. and they corrode a lot of matter and become a fistula, and I came so much that all fell off bowels and moisture from the body;
and many I cured within two years, and there was no cure in the art of hands,
for as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines that were used to treat it, and he who runs through the pores with great speed. and became red on the youth's body, and had an orange-colored complexion.
I pitched a tent in one of these pores, and then searched all the pores
and found that one came together with the other on both sides of the leg.
I hurried then, and I dug into one of the pits as much as I could to uncover a part of the bone. and I found it rotten and broken, and the decay went up to the bone itself;
I knew that the bone I was holding was rotten, and I made sure that there was no other decay in it, except for that which I had already found;
and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and I could not heal;
and then I began, and discovered the bone as before,
and I found the continuing corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then I held it, and leaned to mend the break;
but I could not hold it with my hand on one side of the bone, and so I took it all the way down; and then I put medicine on it; and he was healed and completely mended,
and do not wish to repeat the work further than for the weakness of the disease, which cannot bear, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For in the work there is often blood evacuation, but he was completely healed,
For in the work there is often blood evacuation, but he was completely healed, and gave birth to bone in place of the bone, and was of good disposition and did not cause harm or adversity from all things, nor did it have any bad effects.
and set the head, so that you take the broken cart to the repairer, and uncover the cart on the ground where you see the rope, so that the rope does not damage the cart; and place .i. log or a tree root underneath to support the cart so that it does not tilt; and come as often as you can see and feel the corrosion, and come another time.
And if his nose is corrupted, and does not open any more, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then discover the cart all; then put .I. a hot iron,
and then silk from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silk sure from the long of the corruption .I. hole, if as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the joint corrupted, and silk the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, then there is another injury than an ache from copper.
and if corruption is where it is poked with the hand, or where it is poked with the foot, then that is very painful. but above all you must inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not hurt you;
and you know that the chisel and the fibers to cover those bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and the shape of the teeth. and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for each type of work, there is a suitable tool.
and you know that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you use the instrument for which you are skilled according to what is appropriate.
light a fire The head should be positioned either towards or away from the fire;
and when you have medicine, this corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit at all, it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from death or evil, which is greater, from the fault of the member;
so that the patient escapes from death or evil, which is greater, from the fault of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, and seems to be burnt by fire, and after the blackness, then goes those correlations of the member from one to another. and take it all over the body; if you hurry to cover,
and if by the percussion of certain poisonous animals, such as
the corrosion is at the head of the two, if it jumps, and does not give it space to come by hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cupping glass touches the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, so that the cupping glass touches the neck; and if it passes over the neck, then it is death, and do not wait for the quantity of its virtue
and if it comes up to the first joint, so that the cupping glass touches the second joint;
and if it comes to earth, so cover all the earth. and if it rises in the leg, so cover at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other injury but to make the patient die;
and the way to cover or sew the member so that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister one of the lines down, and another minister the other line up, and you remove the chaps between the 17th and 20th lines to a large 1st stake, as long as the bone is uncovered;
then the cap or silk, and place a lin cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the shoulder; and bring the other injury and abscess to the patient.
And if blood loss occurs when you work, let the area be cauterized thoroughly. Or if there are any powders that restrain it, then return to your medicine until it is finished,
Then bandage the member with a convenient ligature and treat it until it is well.
And I will tell you that he came to Earth in the body of a man:
He had a blackness which seemed like fire burned him.
and that corrosion came first in his two feet, as much as it stained all of the foot;
and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he took off the copper from the foot, and was healed;
and long after that the corruption returned to his two hands, and came to me,
and to me he sits on things that reflect after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion;
and he ordered me to cut his hand, and I do not know how to hope that matter will reflect again; and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he might die; For the power of man is feeble; and he was despairing, and returned to his land; and wrap his hand with copper, and he was healed;
and I do not know but that for this reason only that someone else does something, if it is necessary.
No time comes when the flesh is cut open, and remains so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels; and then rot and pierce, and in the process the bowels jump out, and remain so long that our vassals; and the leather which is above it is also very soft like.i. drapelets deliquescent, and do not corrode as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula".
and cook it so you chop all of the leather, and most importantly when it is thin, as well as our blankets; and do not start for its corruption.
And if you have promised that the leather will be dried, and the corrosion is not yet complete, and the leather is tough like horsehide, so cook it with this mixture:
Look if her breasts are large, and the breast that gives milk has a putrid odor. Therefore, the medicine made in Egypt, which is thus prepared: take likewise, and oil, and lead-ore, equally, and put to cook in .i. vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and the make it in water and honey, and in cauterizing the chest, and extract the perforation; and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
do this mutch times, until the breasts are white, and the milk is stopped;
and never is it clisted with water from ash, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood and pour water over them,
then pour it out, and clisten it, until you know the sinews are well-clisted;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes will help him. If the cauterization is with water and honey where there is a little bit of lead powder crushed. or you the cauterization with honey and wine honeyed, that honey has property of purifying and washing, and the wine brings the blood to its place.
and when you have done this, and you have promised that the breast is well purified, if the cauterization of a woman who has given birth to a horse in her womb
and you squeeze it with oil and rose water and wine. or you cauterize it with certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the chapter on the treatment of herbs.
and if it is small, and the cauterization wound is small, the cauldron cannot enter. if the expansion of a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or Basilicon ointment, as it is expanded;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the ointment can enter easily:
and if the wound is pierced: let the cup or bowl be above, so that it is lower than the wound. For when the bow is drawn to its full extent, if it does not slip. and if you cannot cover the loins with your hands as you see, then appear in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest level it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast with a cloth as you see, so that the bow doesn't fall off to one side: let the bow hang loosely forward, and don't tie anything to it. and take consolidating medications to put on the breast,
and are placed over a linen drape that covers the entire breast; Then cut off as much of the breast as possible from the pit. That is, cut more away from the first than from the second. then place a wound dressing above it. That is, another bandage according to the quantity of the breast pit, and place it over the breast pit to adjust the bow. And do not remove the large bandage for more than a day or two;
and the one on top of the breast pit, remove often to remove the bandage; and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not enough or digested or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when this medicine has spread somewhat in the pit of the chest and you see the nature that comes out on the surface, if you know that the breast is already sore, and bring the salve;
and then let it down in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if change .i. other drape, and renew the dressing.
And if the breast becomes upset after many days, knowing that the breast does not hurt. And if subtle poison enters after a long time, if it does not make you despair of your health,
For the sake of health. For there are men who delay healing by running into their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
and they become indigent and weak after many days, knowing that their liver does not get better.
and if their liver is delayed in healing and becomes inflamed, then take the following medicine: mix wet substances with moisture and dry them with virtue, as an antidote it finishes, for there is much vitriol, and that is the second medicine.
Take a small piece of yellow brass, and form it with oil of roses, and rise it with equal old wine in substance.
then put it on and use it; and this same, once made into honey, cook it thicker, when the finity of oil is not present,
or you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over honey when it is taken off the fire; and then in glue .i. drape, and put it over the chest, and once i administer on arista long, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like wheat flour and hundredweight;
and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like wheat flour and hundredweight; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder of them, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and this cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
and this cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, Then you will know that corruption is complete, and it affects the bone, or hard members, or limbs. if one practices the cure for a fistula, as we have said above.
of the nail bed of the toe
is an abscess that forms at the base of the finger nails on the palms of the hands Here is the translation of the text:
and when he has been wounded, and no attention is taken, then and cut and grind so that it cuts the root of the nail, and by chance cuts all of it;
and comes the corrosion up to the bone, until there is a stinking pain, and the two cheeks are wide apart, and the color flees.
When you treat it as we have said in the chapter on treatment, and the cure does not benefit. If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess which has been retained by the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if the finger pushes down on the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleeds. if you put the rag on top of the finger that pricks the flesh, and pour a little fire onto it, and hold it carefully and lightly. and put on top of the remaining flesh some fiery and corrosive medicine to destroy everything;
If the corrosion is in the bone, then let him be cut and treated with fire, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot heal.
And if you see the corruption of the flesh, then cut it off with a sharp blade, as it is said before: then let the healer apply garlic poultices until he is well.
and if it is wild, and bruised, and it smells of great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut off the nail from the spur with a saw across it;
and be careful that the saw does not come too close to the nailbed, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is something, put something on it to ease it;
The two joints that may break in the hands of some men are both bone and flesh. and by accident they may break or dislocate, but never have any fingers,
and in neither of the two do the roots of the joints arise, or their birth is in either of the two. Whoever is born with two testicles does not move. and whoever is born with the testicles joined together may move;
the size of whoever is chubby so is light in some way: size the in its root from a wide spathule.
Those who are born with a joint root are difficult to treat; if you hold them down with copper.
In those who are born or are wounded in the derriè, it is necessary that you first chop the flesh roundly up to the bone, Then, cut the bone with a suitable chisel and then treat it until it is healed.
The limbs that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, by fire, or similar things.
If you think you can take this sulfur, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two blankets or sheets wet with oil, so they do not stick together; or you put between two thin sheets of leather, until the leathers are stuck together, as it should be.
The sulfur must be taken so that it is repaired according to its natural forms;
Of the vile things
Are those that are full of excess melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
And more are found in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, while others.
It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any purging of the colon, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
The cure for fever is according to .ij. ways: one is that of the cupping, and force the black blood out. and another way if you open the vein, and draw it all out.
The size should be according to this method: raise the first leg with hot water very strongly, until the big vein is visible, and then strain the leg of the sick person from above the hip all the way down to the knee. Then cut the vein at one inch, or two, or three, of a large size.
Then slice and draw forth the black blood from your hand, from one wrist to the other, as much as the patient can endure;
and then tie it off, and instruct him to dye his meat with black coal;
and then begin the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are clean, and tie on the patient.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English: "Then dip it or bathe it, and let it dry: remove the leg from the hot water until it turns red, and inflame the veins;"
"If you do not have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then rub the vein at the top of the thigh, or in the region of the ankle bone;"
"Then soak the skin with oil, and peel off the vein from each part, until it is completely exposed, so that one can feel it;"
and it is red and black when it enters or leather so too as a white rope;
then pour the oil out so that it is elevated from the leather, and then put on the knife lightly,
then take another piece of oil on top of it, two feet away; then scrape the leather along the vein until it appears, then let it hang by its thread, as you did before, and put on another knife, as you did first;
and take another height, or more than you need then reduce it, and cut at both ends of the foot,
and then cut and trim down to the second height; then remove it from height to height until it is completely done, and then cut;
and if you cannot raise and stretch it, then take a very strong and sharp needle, and cut and trim it, and wrap it with thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is done; and let it not break, because if it breaks, we cannot pull or lift it, and this is harmful to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool in wine and oil over the wound and bandage it; and heal it until it is well.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and is not straightened, as we have said, then you must split it open, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
then you must split it open, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The form of iron from which one makes a weapon if it is curved, and does not cut anything except that it cuts the vein.
and it is a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
and it may happen elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the poultice that comes off the skin.
if it enters the body coiling and going down, prevent between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this illness are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then change the legs, and begins the illness to come out, also like a root of a plant.
When the head is open, if it is convenient that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one third to almost two thirds, and tie it off,
and leave the cloth hanging down at the leg, and as often as it comes off, if the wrap around the cloth and the tie and if it is too long, if you take a part of it, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover all the way up to its root, until it is all wrapped up; because if you cut it, if it enters into the pit, and brings about pus and rot, or bad disease there;
for this reason it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the neck, and nothing remains or cors.
and never once has this happened when she was treated with long palms, or with .x. and some of them came to me, who was treated with long palms, and when you cut them, if they are a little raised or dented, and pierce them only up to the root,
then let it be empty; and the matter that is within, and bring medicines to the place of corruption every day, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And never cut at the vein with a knife; leastwise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is. and that it may not break through and hurt him, then heal it as we have said before.
of worms that come between the hide and the cart
is called in our land "buff disease", because it often occurs in buffaloes
and it is a small worm which is born between the hide and the skin, and goes all over the body ascending and descending. and he smells badly from member to member as far as he rips the hide where he went, and jumps far.
and it is infected with some humor, so that it comes towards and crawls and wriggles and worms or scabies.
and one doubts its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye, By chance, it enters and destroys the oil; and such a thing often happens.
When you see him curable and extractable, so you can only do it when he goes.
So it is necessary that you lay him down on a firm bed tightly tied up,
then put a glass of wine in his mouth, and let him drink; and put the little dagger in his hand, If the fire cautery, as long as it dies.
and the greater harm that it does, if it correts the oil, as we have said;
and if you see coming to the head near the oil, then hold it fast with the hand; then lift it up and throw it away;
and use the medicine to dissolve the pains of evil spirits with soluble medicines for evil spirits;
and to prevent meat from putrefaction.
of pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vaporization" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain limbs, and it spreads from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
I was called to see a sick woman, and I discovered a small swelling on her arm.
and then, I saw it rise up like a worm in the shoulder; so quickly that it seemed alive, and as if it were silver when it cut from one place to another;
the pain left the body, and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it corrode all over the body until it reaches the other side;
then he told me that she twisted around again inside the body, as I saw it myself.
I marveled at how much she moved from one member to another, for I had never seen such a disease move in this way before. However, I know of many who have suffered from this illness, and they often experience pain that moves from one part to another. but I don't want to, if I saw it on a woman.
and I thought that was because the woman's body was dry and the veins were exposed, and for this reason it appears that she has wind or gas in her bowels.
and does not appear to those who are delicious and have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you have healed this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the ligature above and remove them properly, and then cut off so much as it feels constrained to its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see blood,
if the cure of those who cause wind, like pills of putrid wine, and pills of horse chestnut, and similar things.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the direction of their flight.
The variety of arrows is such that there are some with large tips, and others with small, and some with hooks, and some riveted. and those with .ij. points, and those with tongues, and those with pieces of wood attached; and the one who bites in any member so bite according to .ij. manners: or in member principle hair bit,
as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When she bites therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appears: if it is necessary that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not perfectly extracted, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
and the sign of the skull when the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, is when paralysis and weakness and twitching and redness in the eyes, and cramp and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it is lost from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and springing out of the moist wound, white, resembling pulses, and jumping also like burned hay;
and this sign will announce to you, if you continue with the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it bites or curls, is that it is near the left breast, and also because it seems to be stuck in something hard, not in something hollow. and if by chance the arrow sounds like pulses, and in black blood, and cold comes and cold sweat, and fainting: And so there is doubt of death.
And the sign of an arrow is that it does not hurt in the place of pain, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he sighs and shudders with cold.
And if the arrow enters in the shell of the chest, then the small ribs ache; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the members move from the shoulders.
And if the arrow enters in the stomach, perhaps there is food that does not digest.
And if the arrow enters the belly, and does not go through the intestine's passage, there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and the urine flows out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if it is the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the aid and the spine and the force and the hips and the legs, and the limb resembling, are safe according to multiple provisions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not cause pain, listen to what I will tell you, for if you do otherwise.
There was a man who had an arrow lodged in his throat at the root of his neck. I tried it, and pulled the fat from the ear on another side, and was healed without pain.
And I tried an arrow, which went into his oil of the ear, pulling out paper from his tongue. and the arrow was withdrawn, and I only felt the tip go towards his fist. and was this arrow of a turquoise color, so that it would pass through the ears without causing any harm; and there were no bad accidents.
And shot an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and was this Arabic arrow to the ears:
I aimed at the beard, and made a subtle shot, and I hit the Christian:
And shot an arrow to a man, which was either at the head or in the belly, and thought he was dead;
and then let it pass .xxx. days, if not its disposition; I cut the arrowhead, and sharpened it, and inserted it, and didn't have a bad accident.
And if you see a bird with an arrow in its throat or back, and the wound is well healed;
and let the arrowhead stay inside it, and don't change its natural position; There is no harm in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow hit in the face, and was sore wounded;
And he remained there suffering great pain; and many others.
And throw an arrow at the king of the princes, who was shot through the neck, and it was a little sagging on the right side; and the arrow was all re-sheathed
I was called to the cure after she had been lame for three days. There was a very narrow wound.
I treated her with a subtle poultice, and I did not feel it at all; and she felt pain and a headache on the right side. I thought this was of the point of an arrow
I put on top of him a plastron made of resinous and digestive substances, so that his limbs do not inflame. and I saw the point of the arrow.
and I saw the point of the arrow. I put on the resinous plaster every day, and quickly healed the wound, and delayed the recovery of the patient for a long time,
As long as he felt the arrow .i. during his life; and he told me. I applied to the wound a corrosive agile medicine by hands, as long as it was open,
and I tested it, and felt the arrow's head which had become stuck; then I applied to the wound by that agile medicine, as long as the arrow's head was clearly visible;
and pass well the boundaries within .iiij. months,
and then he healed if the wound that I put the nails, and the meat on both sides and can't come out;
then I ceased from subtility and invention of means for instruments, until I took .i. day to make nails well; according to him whose form will come at the end of this chapter of chalk, until I tra' it, and restore the wound;
And I see young people whose cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it then, and it was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or have you said the quality of extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot include everything;
But the wise masters compare only a little bit of salt, and on what is present and failing. Truly nine ovre and nine instruments are necessary for the dismemberment of strange things which come in this art.
I say that the arrows should not be shot from the members unless they are prepared according to the nine ways: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and those that leap forth from there where they enter, it is arrows entering into their flesh, and do not leap at all now.
And if it does not leap now, let it remain as the flesh decays within, and let the exit be closed.
and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and change the wound every day.
and then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if there is any pain within, let the flesh be stretched out, and then cut off.
And if the arrow is lodged in the chest if we cannot see it, and we seek it with all our might; and if you feel it, and treat it with appropriate tools;
and if you cannot by stretching the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, or there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, so that the wound is great; and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place, so that the bone is broken on either side where the arrow goes in, which you can feel, and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it.
and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it. and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, that you pull it more painfully.
And if you cannot do it once, so that the ear of the arrow is completely cut off, then pull it, because extraction is painful. And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, so bring the following that we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put no comment that you may draw out the arrow without danger,
or red-hot or fiery-hot or firmly or loudly; and set the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow hit him, For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, which opens nothing, or whose skin is swollen in a particular place, so that it can be seen or felt:
So cut it off above, until the scissors can take hold, and then remove it: if you wait any longer.
If it is held in the bone, turn your hand in a circle until it enters the bone and expands it, then remove it.
If it cannot be removed, let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if it is the arrow that is stuck, pull it out with all your might;
and if he is cut, and you see to administer poultices, if he administers them. I.e. an instrument sharpens, so that the point of the arrow goes into the hair of the instrument; and then pour out,
and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with a point entering in, to cheer the extraction.
And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the skin around where the venom is, if you can, and then treat the wound as necessary.
And if an arrow is caught in the breast or in the belly or in the bladder or on the side, and it is nearby, then you may cover it up with a cloth, if you can.
and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, for that is the task. and treat it until it is healthy.
The form of the clamps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and it should be like this:
And there are many ways to do this: large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the size of the arrow.
the veins of the neck common The veins from which one is healed are .xxxi., because it has head xvi.,
This is what the text says about the veins of the neck: "It is known as the 'herbech', which means two veins that run behind the ears." and the 18 arteries which are in the 2 temples. and the 18 veins that are in the 2 arms of the two hands, which are called "aspires". and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head; and the 18 veins which are at the neck; and the .ij. veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich"; and the .ij. veins that are on the tongue.
The veins that are commonly talked about are .v. in each arm:
the one is the cerebral, and it is on the left side of the neck, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef"; and its name is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and basal. and they call it 'vein of the neck'; and the basilical if it is on the right side, and they call it 'vein of the abdomen', and it is on the light side. and this is the one that is opened, which is clearly visible above the breastbone.
And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it is at .ij. rain;
And in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is dislocated from the socket of the left shin, and the second that is in the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other leg;
And in the other leg are 3 veins dislocated from those.
The headache from the veins behind the ears is helped by the catarrh of the ancient and migraine. and the quality of the headache, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the illness.
and the quality of the headache, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the illness. and rub the place where the veins are with an asperous cloth; then tie the patient's neck with a rope, until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears depending on the head: Keep your hands on either side of your neck, and when you feel the pulse on one side, mark it with your finger.
then take the scalpel, and pierce through the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand up to the whole vein upstream. and cut and clean the meat and the vein thoroughly. Cut two times, and make sure there is no blood left.
then stretch and tie it, until it is healthy again.
and I have said above the incision and the fire cautery in the first book.
The sine of the .ij. arteries that are in the .ij. temples, if it is an old migraine, and sodom and eyes used to water, and to the eyes' tears;
and the quality of the sight is so as I say: and it is that the patient draws out his neck, as long as the .ij. veins appear open. and send blood to the two hands, and then sign of pain in the face;
then lift up the cup to your two hands, and then sign of pain on the top of the index finger, and pour the blood away from the cup, and lift up the cup, and the cloth, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and make the blood run according to your need;
Then unclothe the patient, and set your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
and then make the form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their grafting and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The relief from a vein in the forehead is as good as that from a headache of old age, and from migraine, and from jaundice;
and the quality is such that the patient's neck twists when extracting it, so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
And place the tip on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let out as much blood as you see fit; then cut the neck of the patient, and tie the vein so that it is clean and never again does a wide flame occur.
However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein should be cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break when it is thin.
The first sentence to translate:
and the quality of their health is that the patient should break his neck with no rope, as before.
and then the doctor, and be careful when handling him, a little of the long flame, a little wide, for there is no fire.
And if the flame is subtle, in case of a break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then put it on cotton, and bind it well.
The wound of the vein is so hot that it causes burning, and it also causes fever and facial diseases. such as headaches and redness that come on in the face, and even when they are old;
and the quality of the wound is such that the patient hurts his neck, then he holds his baby with his left hand; and take a long, flexible flame, and burn it between the two nostrils; For the vein does not open well and now the blood will begin to flow.
and do not cut too deeply either, and make the blood flow according to your need, then let it rest for one night, for it is soon restored.
The five kinds of wounds: the first, second, third, and fourth degrees of injury from cutting, burning, and scratching, and many diseases, and inflammation, and ulcers, and gangrene.
and the quality of health is such that the patient pulls his hair out from one side and the other, as we have said; and so the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient cuts with .i. scythe
then heal the long vein slightly, then treat the wound quickly, or as much as is necessary;
then do the same on the other side, then hold the ligature, and tighten the ligature slightly, to strangle the sick person; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
of the healing of the skin the healing of the veins in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and the splits in the lips, and the neck and throat.
and the qualities of the healing: to make the sick person sit before you, and to hold their neck as I have said; and turn the lip, and look at 1 . 2 veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left and know them by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins black around them: So therefore know them both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
So therefore know them both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, So therefore take the larger of the two, and also do the same for the 1 2 veins that are above and below, because this is a similar way.
Of the health of the tongue Of the health of the tongue: that is to say, after the treatment for headaches, which are caused by the opening of the veins in the head, and it concerns the extraction from the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is that the patient swallows between your hands before the sun, and he makes the tongue relax, and looks carefully at each side of a black vein:
So heal them both, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be cut.
Veins which are commonly treated are done according to .i. two ways:
or with fire a little flame sharp, or olive oil subtle as for cut-coves, and is called "aneasil"; and are large and subtle according to the largeness and stretching of the veins. The shape of the fire sharp is so called, and is large as you see it:
And it is a good work to open the veins of the head which are flat and full of big blood and tumult. and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle in point, and it is to save the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The salve of the temple, which is one of these veins, helps against diseases that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly.
And it is fitting for the surgeon to cut away the blood, and to bind up the wound, and not to be afraid of the artery which is below. And if he stops the artery, and blood flows from it, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said; and should not be struck with fire, but cut off as I said.
And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to stretch it out, and change one another; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; and wrap the fire in silk, as we have said.
And if you are able to recognize the place of the injury, so that you can draw out the arm, and touch the place while recognizing the pulse. then sign the location of the injury, then lay the arm down, and wrap the wound in fire silk.
and guard against injuring in the artery when you see the edge broken, for it is from the artery: avoid that.
and if you see coming up above as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from the artery: so hasten then, and put your hand on it with your palm up, and then open your hand so that the blood does not run; for it often happens:
take hold of his arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient; and be in fear, and do not move him until he is well.
And if it does not stop, it will come to you, and the medicine is not given to you, because the chief of the retentives stops it; stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fir tree bark, and make it, and take one of its halves and tie it well until the other day;
If the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said;
And the stopping of the blood is not due to many disorders because of the small size of the wound and the pulse of the arm.
The patient should go to the doctor mid-way through the vein, and from the heart's base. For it is composed of the basal and cephalic, as we have said;
and the doctor should wrap it tightly around the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, the nerve will burst; and it swells up and the patient's legs become gray, and perhaps it cannot be healed;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, it is necessary that you heal the nerve from the instrument anaesthetized; and avoid the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the .i.. nerves, let it be cut short.
The healing of the head when helped, that it pulls blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to heal by touching the olive flame or the pine tree flame, because it is the one that saves all veins, because it does not burn the nerve or the artery.
All the same, one must seek out the lighter case and not grieve over it if one makes a mistake the first time, and start again. And so that the joints of the shoulders do not swell for some men if one makes a mistake the first time, but it is not necessary to grieve. The quality of the health so much depends on your belief.
The first thing you must know about a doctor, if is that medicine is only to be used to maintain health,
and to ward off future diseases; and the doctor should make one of the three incisions that are on the head: that is to say, cephalic, temporal, and basal; and the doctor should make one of these three incisions when the patient has just eaten, in autumn and winter after eating, as soon as the sign of satiety appears;
and the doctor should make one of these three incisions the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
The health of a person who has recovered from disease is not determined by the time of day or season; but rather, it is in all hours and times.
And it does not suit to cure children until they are .xxiii years old, nor women but four months after childbearing until the seventh month. It does not suit to cure the old who have passed .lx. years, for they should be left alone.
And when any person is cured, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he take a light enema. If there is still some food in his mouth, so that the veins do not draw the excessive fluids that are harmful to the main members.
do not heal those who are too sore from meat, nor those who are drunk, as much as they need to be healed, nor those who drop their fluids.
and if he is not healing after a feverish passion, and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and multiple trips to the bathroom, and sleeping and fasting, and whatever else impedes him.
then subtly adjust the humors, if he is overweight, through meat, drinking, and medicine, if you have it.
and then enter the bath, if nothing is harmful to him, because it weakens the blood.
and heal from the wound at the back of the neck by the third day, as we have said;
and protect him on days of work, and from hunger, and from lust, and from similar things;
and be lying and jointed, and let the healer be higher than he who is healed, and wash his arms.11 times or 13 times,
Then remove the ligature with care, for when it is too tight or too loose, he cannot run without it.
and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
and then dip the wound in a small cup of old oil, and then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding, so that the vein does not run and does not bleed. For there are veins that run out like strings from the body, and if they are of such a nature that they are prone to windiness, so that when one applies fire to them, if one takes it away, the vein cannot be opened, and so they are of this kind;
and if one opens the vein, if it is too narrow, for one thing, so that the blood flows out, and also
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if one begins again a little more slightly or on an ambulance, if the veins are swollen.
And if it swells up, and the patient hopes, let him lie one or two days, and bind not his arm. For in case there come abscesses; do not enter a bath, but begin again the treatment if it pleases him;
and if the fracture is small, or the joint is slightly dislocated, and you doubt whether it will move as much as you see, so that the fire may be applied to all the fracture without pain;
and make a small wound, so that the swelling is less when the wound is made; for this often occurs, when the wound is small:
If you see the wound open, then do not recommend the use of salt, and put a little oil on it, because it dries up the blood in this place where the oil is placed.
and so administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and so it makes a triple and bowing sound when you put it on the wound; if it is too thick, it makes a subtle sound and splits when it is too large.
And if there is a large abscess, which often comes when the opening of the vein is small, then it must be done; If you hurry, put on the shoulder a wet sponge in water and in hemp a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flowing from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green, so no harm to it; and if you see, put on anything of aloe or myrrh made up of juice of calamus, monkshood, or something like it.
And often the appendix and the appearance towards the side of the base: put your hand there, and if you feel the soft spot under pressure from your hand, that is the appearance. So then you must not put anything on any of what we have said, for by chance in the heart without the artery; but make it .i. plaster dry so that it hardens the place, and then heal it with other cures until it is healthy.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it stay until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are healthy and have the need to extract blood, let them make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them little by little, and one should heal them by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this method of healing is preserved from the decay of blood and the hurting of nerves, and it is better than the long surgery does not do wide cuts.
And to him whose course needs surgery, it is necessary to give moist wine in grape juice; if he is heated, if he has a fever, drink three times or four times.
And if he is of cold complexions, if he drinks moist wine before the surgery in musk syrup, or honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if he sweats to sickness, after the flow of blood, it is convenient that he hums brew of car, and syrupy scent.
and use of other things which we have said in the chapter or paste for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he vomits up a arm, and sweats sometimes, if it is convenient, when he is weakened by great sickness, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue which continues continually.
And if he vomits up an arm after the first sickness, and he has a strong body, if he heals in 6 hours after the first sickness, or in 7 hours.
And who must be healed from another side, if he must be healed on the second day or third day.
For he has blood flowing inside his body which is heated up and causes fever. If this happens, a large amount must be extracted, and the opening made so wide that it can pass through with ease. and then you must perform all the conditions for healing, and put your hand on his pulse as he heals, so that death does not come from pain. and this often happens when healing is neglected.
and it is not necessary when you see the dislocation of the arm, and make it come out again without the second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly on it; if it is curved, that he extends the arm carefully, for this would be bad;
but let it rest until the second time it is well; or you put to it at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that has been frozen by the opening flows again; and put on .I. piece of silk, and press lightly.
And if the vein has escaped, leave it and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is calmed down.
And if need be to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs through the arm is called the "chief vein," and it should not be punctured for drainage.
And the method of the drain is that the patient dips his hand in warm water, so that the feverish color disappears.
And so let it move gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then he keeps it now from top to bottom, not wide or long.
and be careful not to hurt the joint of the hand, and don't let it get wet, put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water until you have enough;
and if it's cold, don't put the hand in warm water, because we put it more in summer than in winter;
and this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve.
The salve of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is its method:
Exhaust the hand, and dip it in warm water until the vein has disappeared, if you can see it. And bend it across, and cut it all over, if it doesn't harm anything;
And don't cut too deep, for the nerve are all exposed from the core;
and then put hand in warm water, he is still frozen in the wound, and can not pull it out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if put on the vein oil and thread to sew it tightly, and do this for each vein.
The surgeon must remove the disease from the patient's left hand, and do everything as I have told you before the right hand.
And the surgeon must remove all diseases that are below the belt, If it is a disease of the hips, and retention of flowers, and a disease of the kidneys, and of the feet and legs old, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is that the patient should drink some hot water, and rub the vein until it stops. and the joint at the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And if you cure it on the stone, be careful of the knots that are loose, and cure it by traversing as when digging; and let the fire burn away.
And if the wound cannot be drained, put the stone in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if it is cured the first time, start the second time above a little hole, because the leech is salty; do not doubt about the strength, as we have said, and make the same treatment with the other foot evenly.
The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint, and its pain reaches the knee, when it is due to injury.
And the quality of this pain is such that the patient enters or leaves by the foot, and it is pulled out from under the ankle. If there is twisting,
For otherwise the nerve does not open; and if it opens, so that you can feel it with your fingers in all directions, and going across; and it makes a sound when you touch it, for the leg is exposed, and it is very soft to the touch.
and it makes a sound when you touch it, for the leg is exposed, and it is very soft to the touch. And if you don't treat it, so that there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nails;
and do so much damage to the leg that you can see it, then cut the ligature, and place cotton and hold it; now it is healed.
Sores from suction cups
are made of horns, or glass, or quartz; and the suction is made in one of two ways: either by wounding and drawing out blood, or without wounding.
And this ventilation which is not to hurt if it is according to .ij. manners: or she is all fire, or without fire;
and .ij. others in .ij. costois du cou; et le ventouse desoez le menton; and the suction cups of the shoulders; and the suction cup over the collarbones; and the suction cups around the biceps; and the suction cups around the thighs; and the suction cups around the ankles; and the suction cup does not treat blood flow, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body;
and for this reason do not block it completely, as is done with vein surgery; and it is not necessary that she be amenable, nor that there be any fire or heat, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until the whole body is empty.
And if for a necessity of diseases it is necessary to ventilate, or by customs, let us amenable each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and emit and in every season;
For there are those who, when they have the need to ventilate, become much heavier;
and if there are those who, when they truevent, come from repletion and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness of eyes;
and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if there are such people, and see no blood and vomit and die and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is half past midnight, we command them to fast for 2 hours that day.
The saint of the muse helps with grief in the heart ... but it is not until all blood has been evacuated from the body that he comes to the aid of those who are grieved.
and this ventilation if it is in the place of the health of the cerebral,
and it does not suffice that he who is of a cold complex use this, or who has a fever, because this does him much harm;
and for this purpose neither the old nor those who have cold diseases should use it,
And he who is often treated with this, if he becomes dizzy, and for this reason one should place the cautery a little more down by the doubt of dizziness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place at the base of the skull and the basilica, and for this reason it goes to the extraction of the foot. and with a cut of the channel of the palm, and all, and repletion;
and it is necessary to press down, because if it holds too tightly, then in the stomach or the heart or the chest.
The ventilation of the neck is in place at the base of the skull and the basilica, and for this reason it goes to the extraction of the foot.
and is in the place of the sanctity of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command to the saint that he express his hand at the putting on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not take away blood with a wound.
The winds of the mouth bring to disease of the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and is at the place of the sanctities of the two lips.
The winds of the shoulders bring to disease that comes from heat and filling.
The winds of the collar bring as much as the three veins of the arms, For she draws out blood from these large veins.
and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for his veins are naked and can be easily cut through, and know how to tie off arteries and veins.
The suction cup placed on the back is suitable for sucking out the foundation blood, and the pus from the abscesses, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large and made of leather, so that it has the ability to well suck; and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break, and would make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs open widely, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are suitable for the old pains of the knees, and of the ankles, and of the bladder, and turn back the flowers; and they are in place of the 12th bone, and of the 12th joint, and moreover they weaken the body greatly after a long time, and bring about premature death in many cases.
Here is the translation of the provided Old French text into English:
And if it is thick, then you must hurt it once with a sharp instrument; the first time to cut through the thick vein.
And if it is very thick, then you must hurt it a third time; and when we want to squeeze the blood out little by little, then we must press hard once.
And when we want to squeeze the blood out little by little, then we must press often; and if it is thick, then we must firmly press until the veins burst suddenly.
and to those who have thick leather and tough skin, that you anoint the joints of the suction cups with oil which opens and dissolves. if it is in a state of stiffness, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in a state of tension, of nettle oil, or of lily oil, or of chamomile, or other similar thing.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of myrrh, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if someone has a tender back and large pores, it is not appropriate to put any oil on it,
but it is appropriate to wash after the wind has passed with rose water, or cold water, or water from a mulberry tree, or water from a cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
And if one has moisture due to sweat, if it rises thus, or with water from mistletoe, and sumach, and similar things.
And if one has excessive fluids, they rise from old wine, or water from fennel, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not appropriate to use a suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or .ij.; and do not sleep after the suction.
and it is appropriate that he warm up, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And warn if the one who is being treated is coleric, and if his skin is too hot and inflamed; if it is appropriate that he drink cold things, like grapes, endive, lettuce, and sage, and similar things;
and mint juice, and cheese curds, and moist meat.
And those with a cool complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and mint juice, and mint curds and small birds and pigeons;
and let him drink as much as he can when the wind blows, for he must drink more than eat;
and it is appropriate to give some people triple or musk-flavored food before or after exposure to the wind, to strengthen the main members; and be careful with the sun, but it only works if you're hot.
The leeches that are used to hurt are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly, and the bowels, and the anus, for this member does not suffer to be hurt on the skin.
and one does it only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put leeches on the breast when there is no pain; by removing the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and the bowels to weaken the member,
and bone the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if bone by its own power attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
and so it is done when you put it on the liver and on the stomach when there is wind repressed,
and these suction cups are emptied only to suck up; and never are they emptied together fire, and never is plain water drawn,
as if for the diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water, or with water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup is made from this:
And it has .ij. two inches in diameter and a palm's width across the top, and it has an orifice at the center about as wide as a pin, just as to pass through a needle
and be of brass, smooth before so that it does not bruise the patient when placed on the limb;
and has in the center a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a candlestick
and may they be great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the sucks of children are other than those of old men, and leaner than fat.
And this suck must be put on the limb:
take the candlewax or liniment, and place it between the thumb and finger at the top of the thumb, which is placed between the thumb and finger, So that the clarity is at the bottom of the vacuum so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and your two are on the hole that we have said, so that when you press, if there is steam, and then take off the vacuum;
and take the lining as before, and recommence it often, if you need to do so.
In the vacuum that has been prepared for pleurisy, there is no verge or pit, and it is only prepared when it is plain of water, and is placed on the member as little as possible;
and this is the form:
are not adjusted except in limbs where it is impossible to put a suction cup due to their smallness, as in the case of lips and gums, and similar things; and in the case of naked limbs of horses, as in the case of two or three-year-old horses, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find suction cups that are in smooth, clear waters without danger, if you take them;
and put a nut in the water until they are familiar with it, and do not have anything in their bellies. and then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices.
and when they are healed and have become strong, one can then use a blister, for it is useful after that.
If not, raise the member thus, and then dip it in water well, and then squeeze it.
and if it is left too long after the heart of the body, so wet .i. linen cloth in cold water and put on, until the heart has dried up;
and if it increases, so put on vitriolic paste or gangrene and similar things until it has dried up;
or you put on the middle of peas peeled, and let them burn at the fire for now they will dry up;
and if you have more work, then take other veins.
And if the sutures do not want to take hold, then rub the site of the cut with fresh blood or stick an needle in it as long as there is no blood. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they start to burn;
and when you see that they are crying, then powder a little aloe and wormwood, or ash, so they will stop crying now.
This is the beginning of the book on fractures
The chapter on cauterization is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is used for restoring breaks and dislocations.
Know this, o son of a scholar, that the wise men poured this chapter on cauterization upon you, that you have never read such in any of the old books, nor have you ever read a letter about it.
and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good book about it;
and I know nothing of it, except by the science of the ancient books, from which I have studied and practiced the art, and through experience, and through the customs of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have condensed it at the end, and have clearly depicted the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these twenty-nine chapters before.
It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sum of words and chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when there is a break, dislocation, twisting, or distortion in someone, it is necessary for you to hurry to save the patient from pain on both sides, if anything does not prevent him from walking, as weakness of the spine, or infirmity, or old age;
or if his legs are too tight or too loose; and he should not eat cold dishes, nor drink wine, nor eat any greasy foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the appendix, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the patient returns to his usual governance that he has used.
And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that heals well, or has viscosity like cooked bread, and rice, and peas, and pies made from cheese, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with good nutrition, the break will heal faster and sooner.
And know that the broken nose of old or weak people cannot heal or harden the members well according to their nature, nor those that are too tender, as is the case with the nose of small children;
but has no cure, reset the broken bones. i. large and thick meat that hardens and joins the member together, as much as it can; and does not leave it all to heal itself, and because it is necessary to feed it with large meat, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes up, and another that goes down, as when one cuts with an awl, so that the wood is split.
For there is a fracture that goes up, and another that goes down, as when one cuts with an awl, so that the wood is split. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that makes a small split.
And at each manner has its own engine, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place.
and is done by the break of the bone by what the line is twisted, and open well from behind, and some to the presser of the hand;
and when there is no twists ne are on the toe, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
but it can have twists, or a crack, or a small break. If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put medicines upon it that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
And know that the break that comes in the arm, and are the three parts separated, it is now necessary to put them together evenly, so that the knots come first.
and let the knots be calm, if you do not move for a day, as long as the knots are calm. then put it evenly with a tool that you can use easily and carefully, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then restrain it, as it is necessary hereafter.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is the hand or foot or a small member of the limb or two strings, or a string and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you remove by all means the additions in their places at the end of the operation so that your work does not cause the patient pain or injury;
and carefully set the two shoulder joints according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the joint is set firmly, and do not tie it too much, do not press it as those who make it come from their work of cauterizing hot and contracting at the member, as we have often wanted.
And when the limbs are fixed, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither when he is awake nor when he is asleep, nor when he turns over, nor in any other way. and guard well that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain. For when there is no pain, then it is safe, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position where it feels no pain;
For when there is no pain, then it is safe, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position where it feels no pain; and guard well that it is put correctly, so that no twist comes when it is reset;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I have told you.
I know that broken members are diverse in size and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as bras and doi and others: it is convenient to wrap with linen cloth soft and fine;
and those that are thick, such as thigh and leg: it is convenient to wrap with a wide and strong linen cloth, for the wide linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it evenly from all sides, so that there is no taste;
Then he steps back a little, .iij. times or iiij. according to the member, and holds your hand slightly away from the limb, then goes up over the break and holds it less, so that the break then moves slightly apart from the break;
and softens the limb a little and a little, until you press hard on the sound part, then take .i. other limb and turn again very much over the sound spot;
Then go back to the sound part of the break and hold it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first step above;
Then put between the linen or drapes threads so that they are all the same length, then lay them all over .i. bend, and then put your well-made stirrups on; if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or boil, put on it a cold poultice and let it stand for a few days.
Then extract them from the elbows, and let them be half a handbreadth wide, or a fist made of wood or palm leaves, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the bone that one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be also as long as necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
and hold them on the splints also as you did with the first, then tie above it a thread in advance, as in the first with the blade.
and then tighten it more than before, less; and it is necessary that the thread be not too thin, not too thick nor too narrow, and it is made of linen.
For if the thread is thick, like those I have seen made for the ropes of the lances which are twisted linen, and this is a great mistake, because the lances cannot be equal if they are too thin, and it is necessary that there be between each splint at least two inches of space.
And if the patient is wounded between the splints after the tightening of the ligaments, then he sews them with linen thread or a cotton cloth so that he does not scar.
When the wound is with the breaker, and the curse is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it does not come to extract all the members of a broken person on the first day. For when the members are great, it does not come to put on gloves before the day of the 25th or the 30th, or more according to the urgency of the aposteme, hot sometimes.
and use the following method of ancient embrocations to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour so it stands at the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the embrocator restoring the fracture in many ways, especially for women and small children, since it is not too thin or too thick.
Another way of plastering that restores fracture, dislocation and torsion: take honey, blackberry juice, nettle leaves, arnica, gum arabic, muget, aniseed, mirr, aloes, alecyl; and grind them into powder, and mix them with sheep's fat. If the complexion of the body is warm, use this plastering, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones and benefits many people.
Another way of plastering that benefits from torsion: take muget and viscose, aniseed, mirr, aloes, acacia, blackberry juice; grind them well and mix with oil or sheep's fat, and administer it.
Another way of plastering for joints and bones out of place, and to soothe sudden pain and cut bone: take a new lamb, and grind its flesh with water and oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but is good for soothing sudden pain in an aposteme [joint] and properly heals the pain.
Another way of plastering that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and earth leaves [ 아마도 "토양 잣"을 의미함], grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for treating bone fractures and reducing the remaining abscess. Take an equal part of wormwood, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, and grind them with wine; heat the members, and apply it with coriander water or vinegar, and use it.
Another, stronger method than the first, for treating abscesses during the restoration of the member. Take an equal part of wormwood, flax seed, plantain, melilot, and fennel, as well as violet flowers and camomile, and grind them with salt water or plain water or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras says that you should not put anything on the broken member except a wax and oil paste, and nothing else; he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galenus says that you should put dry things that are a little warm on the broken member, in order to restore it; we have said this before: for example, mirr and aloe, incense, and similar things.
Autre manière d’empâtrer que vaut à la léison et à la douleur: prenez mugath et chevolz d’omes décopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismale veau, et seil égalment, et les broyez, et en fais empâture et lu lie.
And then take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved out of place; if so, do not take it apart with your hands.
And if the pain or itchiness comes back to the spot, and there is no rest or swelling, do not delay, and take it apart, and now apply the poultice; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it into the water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is gone; Then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put a dry cloth on it, moistened with spring water or rose oil, and tie it with a knot, until you are sure that there is no heat;
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve its pain, then continue the gentle massage, and a little bit of ointment, and do not strain it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that abscess, redness, pain, and swelling are all gone, and you need to use ointment and bandages, then continue with the same treatment as before, as you have done in the first place.
And if the member does not improve as we have said, then do not dislocate it again until at least three or four days have passed, and never more than ten days. But according to what is observed, as long as the rupture approaches the shoulder joint,
then hold it back more than before, and let it grow thicker, as I have said before; and if you see that the member is drying up more than necessary, know that dislocation will not come; Let the patient take a hot bath every time he dislocates it, and do so every day, and pour a little oil on it.
By this work then, the patient should wrap his member tightly in a cloth, and carefully stretch it out; this is painful, and if it causes pain in the joints, and I see no other way but to make it loose and set it right.
of the various ways of breaking There are many ways to break something, and there are different shapes and causes for it.
For he has fractures that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way down to his ribcage, as if it were a stake or a pole; and for this reason this mode of breaking is called "hematoma".
Or the spear pierces the bone from above, and this mode of breaking is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is impact within, or a split or fracture from the collarbone of stone, or of a chair on a stone, or of other things.
And if there is a perforating fracture that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or that is on top of the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that has healed over bone as fine as hair, and the split is small, and for this reason it is called this rupture "capillary";
And if the wound is made by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and a piece of bone enters the body, and the head becomes twisted as the blacksmith does when he works on the bellows; then enter into the stone.
And if there is a joint in the neck that has become moist with sweat, like the head of a child;
and all these types of fractures are similar to small pieces that are broken up as if they were tiles; and I will speak about them in their own time.
And let us know all kinds of broken bones by traction on them, and the investigation in tents, and by the corrupt cart which is above.
The appearance of hair is obtained by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, thus opening the fracture blacken it.
In the treatment of fractures, be careful of the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, extension, palmating, feverish water, or the hairs standing on end, and other similar signs in multiple disorders, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see such a frightening accident, and you expect salvation to begin, then start the treatment.
And when you first deliver the baby, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after its birth that you can do.
And if it is in summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the tissue that covers the skull, you must split it open: and it is that you press the head of the malady, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if the injury of blood comes with the discovery of the bone, or abscess, you must help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet linens in oil. and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and are sure of the loss of blood; then begin to cut into the bone, and it is made according to 1.ij. ways of work: one way that you cut at the narrow end in front, and this is the form:
And then I bottle another length longer than the first.
And the second way is that you have several different lengths, some are short and others are long, and they are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it from within, thus that you bring the tallets with tares, not entirely through so that the point goes beyond the bone, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, that does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the edge of the bone, so that you have tares for all the test; and this is the form of the 1.ij. ways of tares:
Here is the translation of the provided text:
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it seems to you that you should remain the апретеit which is delayed from the bone to any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more pliable and thinner than the other incisor;
and if it does not delay any small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is lightly cut with .i. instruments; then cure the wound with the tithes and ointments that we have said.
And the other way of work which is that which Galen says, and it is much safer; and the word is very strong, and it is his saying: It is first necessary that you uncover part of the bone, where the fracture opens widely, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put on the edge of this lenticular incision, from which it takes its form:
And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in 1.2 edges, so that the cutting goes around the bone; then beat a little mallet from above, so that you chop the bone lightly all around, and you take great care of the cloth that is attached to it;
if it hurts the bone, so the bone is lightly chopped, because if you cut the bone well, harm does not come to it, and fear does not come to it.
And if the bone does not hurt the skin, and the bone is cut only as much as necessary above, and there are small pieces, then feel that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to adjust in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you are about to shave with a sharp razor, and then with a finer one, do not cease from doing so until it is done well.
In each of the other haircuts and fine trimmings, you must provide advice according to their style; this is a thing that is not well replied to by those who have put their study in this craft.
And if the wound is clean, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and oil it with oil, and put it on the wound; Then take another doubled cloth, made of two or three pieces, and oil it with wine and olive oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this lighter than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then hold it above the other linen, and do not strain it except to soak the wound entirely;
and leave it thus.i.j.r. or j.r., until the abscesses are calm, then release it, and administer medicines as roots of herbs, and flour of times, and incense powder, and aristolochy, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer medicines sometimes without stinging;
and guard that the wound is clean and dry, so you do not allow infection to enter, nor do you allow any bowels to gather together over the wound because when bowels gather over the wound of the skull, if it is corroded and rotten, it causes the patient great evil; for when you put on a wound a poison-containing thing, if it burns above it.
Therefore, take care that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
And if blackened comes only because of the medicine that you have put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and 1 drape of glue, and put it on the wound; and then the treatment of ways as it understands, until he is healthy.
Know that the .ij. parts of the neck above are never broken by the fall, because they are .ij. bones; and this neck bone is cartilage, and does not break unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the .ij. parts is broken, then you should put your little finger or thumb at the end of the neck, and make it equal to the natural shape by turning it from side to side, until the neck regains its natural form; and do so lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
And if he breaks in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to his place, then you shall put him equal with a ray of light in the head.
And if he breaks in two parts, then do not restore it the first day, but hasten to restore it the first day if you can.
If it does not heal after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess is dried up, then bind the head with linen cloths, if he breaks in one part.
And you should bind another with another, if he breaks in one place, and let the cloths be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
And they said that one should not soak the tent in oil, and let it dry every day. I do not think this is right, but it seems that the tent should be soaked in sheep's fat, and powder from a mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And never use goose feathers in tents, and if it's wet drape it with linen, and let the breeze blow through it, and blow the illnesses out; or else do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes while you are sewing, then put cotton or wool soaked in oil on it, or a little bit of dyakylon.
And if an abscess comes, then put plaster on it, made of meal and powder of silsage, mixed with sheep' fat, then put it on light clothes, and don't tie the cloth;
and if the breaking of the neck is small, and it is broken into little pieces, so it is extracted with suitable instruments for this, then cut the wound, and cure things that cause chafing of the car, and souding, as plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
and if there is no wound within the neck, then heal the tenderness, and put on leathery clothes, until he is healthy.
of the breaking of the jaw
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is only a little one, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inwards, then know that it can be reset gently.
If the fracture is in the right side, then insert your two fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left mandible, then insert your two fingers from the right hand, and press gently inside and turn the other way, making it even.
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in 1/2, then it is necessary that you give support with an extension of 1/2, until it is even.
And if there is movement or pain, then strain it with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then put on the broken mandible a cerote, and put on 1 double drape; and put on the drape a long and wide piece of leather that fits the mandible, and fasten it to the jaw with a hook; and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the face is changing, then put it aside on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on, with flour from the mill mixed with ash or bran; after which you have taken off the cerote; and put on a light plaster, and if the plaster dries up, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it for as long as it remains healthy; often 3 weeks.
And if abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take out any piece of the bone; if subtle of the ostium are tools suitable for this.
And if the wound is tight, then broaden it with flame according to your need.
And when you have taken all the pieces of bone, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, then put on it plasters suitable for this, to protect it, until it is healed.
of the arm of the arm broken several times before, before the shoulder, and the break so is according to 2.3 ways: or it is broken and dislocated in 2.1., and I have pieces, and is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
And the overtaking so is when the break is without pain, that you have 2 ministers, so that one pours water on the shoulder that is broken; and the others extends the neck toward the side; then place equal to your two sides, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or hair.
And if you have need to extend more, then put a round staff of cloth, or of wool, and make it heavy according to your necessity; and lift and stretch the shoulder, and hold the staff in your hand, so that you place equal the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shaft away from the shoulder as it comes out completely, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back and raise the shoulder with one hand, and hold the neck of the shaft with the other, until the bone of the shaft is raised.
And then place the break on both sides, and if you find a small fracture, then you must split it open; and pull the pieces out lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined together by any means, then wrap the tool around the limb for protection:
and make it into a spoon-shape, and let it not be too narrow, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the scope of the work; and have .ij. chieries, if you wish, and one is wide and the other is narrow, just as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you broke the bones:
and when you are secure of the joint, if the wound is hot, and if the fracture is small, or if you doubt about the joint, then employ the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come up, if it is damp, dip a cloth in oil, ash, and wine, and put on.
The extraction of bone, when it is sore and swollen, is that you put on the bone a plaster of the flour of the mill and of ash of hen, and put light strokes on, and put an awl through the joint if you need to do so; Then take a very long band of one palm wide, then put two cloths on top of each other, and wrap the plaster in; then take a thin stick of two hands wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is hanging down; and put the stick on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and fasten the break at the elbow; and take off from each part, and when you see that the time is right for the bandage to stay in place, and you can clearly see that the stick does not move away from the bone, then put it on every day, and when it is tight, if it relaxes,
and make the sick person lie on his side, and put it on him when he sleeps . i. that he makes a hole in the shoulder blade, so that the dislocation comes up higher; thus will the break be eased by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes from it, until 20 days;
then start the treatment again if you see that it is necessary, hold and let it be like this until he is healed; and it is healed in about 26 days, and less for some men.
from the break of the shoulder
Then have the shoulder properly cut and prepared, and do not touch it until it is ready; then apply the powder from the mill with water, and make it light, and put it on 1. double cloth; then put a wide and thin piece of wood on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and strip the hair from the wood in any place on the shoulder, except that you use linen thread; so that the wood is equal on all sides; and then bind it firmly, so that the wood does not move at all, and inspect it every day; and whenever it becomes loose, rebind it, and make the wood equal if it moves out of position, and lay the patient down on his side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 or 25 days.
And if a piece of the bone extends forward and does not tear the flesh, then cut it with the saw, and make what we have said in breaking the forceps to soothe an abscess hot.
of breaking the piece
and if it is broken in the middle, but it breaks often towards the outside; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines to the root, and causes great pain to the patient, and a lack of aliveness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and smells bad.
and if the patient lies down on his back and the doctor places a cushion between his legs, then presses the shoulders together, and with subtle movements places the ribs at equal intervals, in all ways as necessary; then wrap him in a light cloth, and cover it with salt or another lighter substance, and tie it securely around the bone, so that it does not move; and return it to its place on the back, and hold it fast, and adjust it every hour, and if it relaxes, then release it; and if he needs to be released for corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in the manner of cures; then remove the covering, and hold it securely until it is healed.
Of the break of the ribs
I know that the break of the ribs does not come except in large ones behind the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend too much because they are thin; and I feel it well to the touch.
And restore them so that you leave the break even, if it is right. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a splint, if you need to.
And if the break of the ribs is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and pain, as if he were crying, because the bone hurts; and it makes him dizzy, and he vomits much blood, and it is bad health, and the old have put great effort into it.
And if of those who serve that it comes to administer meats which swell the belly, so as to throw the wind away from the back.
We do not make this, that warm blooded animals do not come, if it has not come. And if it has come, let the patient be seated.
And say that there is no one who puts the cup on top, to suck up the form, and this seems right; nevertheless, doubt I that the cup draws up the excesses to the top by the disposition of weakness.
And they said that everyone should cover the place of another's moisture with hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then be cured from the plague cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear the bone which punctures the towel, there is doubt in the patient; then it is necessary to split over the bone of the broken rib, and to put a tool there so that the medicine does not leave; and then the bones must be cut, and pulled lightly, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure them with ointments until they are well. And if abscesses come up, then put wet sheets in oil, and put on his place; and cure while the place of that who has an abscess is clean, and let it rest comfortably on the rib where he should be, until it is well.
from the break of the neck
No comment comes And when it happens to anyone, and you know if he will be healed or not, see if his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor extend them, and when you prick them with a pin, if they do not feel pain. Know that it is fatal in many conditions, and if they are mute and feel pain when they are pulled and not moved, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient will be healed, if he is put to work.
And when similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know if he will be healed or not, see if his joints are soft, and if the accident that has happened in his hands, and on his back is windiness and excretion without will; and when it is soothed on his belly, if there is excretion without will. And when it is soothed on his back and he wants to stand, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not work at all in his treatment.
And if this accident does not come to him, then this is the lightest thing.
And if this cure is that you give him oil of rose or oil of meadow-weed, as much as it is soothed; then put on one of the plasters comfortably and dry, and tie it with a rope, and order the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if any tooth is loosened, cover it with a cloth; and set the tooth back in place, then join the 12 lips of the wound together, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat the infection with ointment, bringing water to the surface, until it heals. And if the tooth is broken, which is called "the tooth of the jaw," if you hold your pouch with your left hand and put the poultice on top with your right hand, then make it even, and if you need to, put the splint on, and if any teeth have been loosened, tie them together, and cure the wound until it heals.
for the break in the bone of the thigh
If the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it has, there will be a little decrease at the top; and reduce it with an awl, and bend it to the right side, and there will be pain and swelling for the patient in that place, and a lump will form.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, make it even, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or she declines inward, let the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is arranged. And when you have made it even, if you place it on the plaster, then put a beam of wood or timber upon it and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and fill in the space between the ribs with earth until it is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And when the abscesses come, if they do not pricked, until the abscesses are healed, and place this which we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, unless there is any bad accident; and that is the way.
of dislocation of the shoulder
of dislocation of the shoulder The shoulder is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of these two ways: of which one is that you take a strong lever, according to this form:
And you take 2 chains and tie them together, and lift them up, and cut the patient on one side; then put him on the lever arm of the fust, until he comes to the dislocation, and take a piece of wood to support it; then put him on any heavy object or hold it with his ministers; then you join the two ends together of the break, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other way is that you support the patient on his enemy, and tie his hand to his neck, then order 2 ministers that one hold what is on the break with their hands, and the others stretch out each according to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then strap .i. the joint of the shoulder, and on top of it, and extend each of the servants to his part. And if the joint is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary for you to put .i. the strap around the shoulder, and another one toward the chest, above the joint; and if the joint is towards the chest, then it is necessary to tie it lightly, without working too much, until the joint is in its place, and on top of the chest; then make the joint equal as it should be, and extract it, so that there are no abscesses.
And if abscesses come, do not extract it until 5 days have passed, and put on the wound a poultice of ash and oil rosin, until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the joint, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; then wrap it up, and extract it on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of rest, unless something hurts it, or the bone is broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and put on the joint a splint wider and stronger than the others, and leave between each splint 2 inches of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes the joint 3 inches from each side; then extract on the splints, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the joint, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the seat of the stars, and the extraction, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess hot, so leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .ii. days, that itch does not flourish or come to the seat, or the new growth cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If it is addressed, as we have said.
And if such an accident does not occur, do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put the shoulder in a cuisse of lamb evenly twisted, and look every hour during the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move or become softened; if it begins to improve, make it large. It is usual for the shoulder and leg to be retrieved after ten days; and then he should be untied and given baths and medicines of ointments to address the pain. And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, do not untie it until one or two months.
of the break in the arm
The arm is composed of .iij. bones, which are called the 'fiscule', one of which is small, and lies near the thumb; and the other is large, and lies opposite to it. The large fiscule may break away by itself, or both may break together.
When the small fiscule is broken, the repair is easy and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is bad healing, and more painful than when they are both broken together. If only the small fiscule is broken, then the proper thing to do is to stretch it slightly and make it even.
And if it is the large fiscule that needs to be stretched, then stretch it more strongly; and extend it on .iij. cuisses, and tilt the pouchet of the hand higher than the other two, and the small fingers lower than the others; and let the patient cross his arms over himself at the shoulder, or with a strap, and one minister at one elbow, and another at the other above. And then make the arm even according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, then place each one in its place, and if there is any that does not grip the curb, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it to the bone, as we have said before.
And so with the cauterizer to wound, I have spoken of it to the unique chapter; if take the cure.
And if in the beginning of recovery there are abscesses, there is a bandage made from oil and wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and this bandage is placed gently above it, until the abscesses have subsided. And then the wax is removed, and powder from the mill with plenty of vinegar is applied, and the plasters are put on, and let the bandage which is on the bruise dry a little more than the others; and know that there should be vi. plasters or arms in various dispositions: whether the bruise is in one bone, or in 11. If you strain it further than anywhere else, and always less as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the ointment; and let the bandages which are on the bruise be soft and wet, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread from which it is pulled be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And return the member and the ligament after several days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should wash the member with hot water until the itching has subsided; and let the member rest without being confined. And then begin again to strain, and if the ligament is relaxed and the bone is deformed, and similar things, then address it.
And if the member becomes too confined, then you should make it a little softer, and leave it thus for several days, until the confinement has passed, and then begin to strain again.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then let it be until .xx. days, or until he is able to walk, then let him tie his hands to his neck, and make his necks equal, and guard against movement and damage, and sleep on his back; and know that this healer is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the break in the hand
Says that at the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and it comes but a little often.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or splinters, so that the patient cries out, and sits upright before him equally; then put his hand on the table extended, and extend the minister the bones that are broken, and put them equal to the mirrors, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and staples, if there comes any, then put a cloth according to the quantity of the place; and is wrapped in 1. drapes of linen.
Et s'il se brise au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu'il l'estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l'estrain d'un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l'estraint, si com il covient.
And if it breaks at the back, then it is necessary that you put a splint on, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then wrap them tightly around the hand, and seal the joint between the two.
And if it breaks on one of the two hands, then it is necessary that you make it even, and hold it steady, as it should be; and you hold it with the plant, and if you see that it doesn't move, then you lift the break with a small straight splint, and don't let it move; and if it breaks on the other two hands, then you make them even, and tie them together tightly so they stay in place; or you tie them all together while holding them up, so they stay in place, or you put a splint on it, like a pouchette; and take care with the treatment and arrangement of the aposteme, and assist those who are injured, as I have said.
De la cuije briseure
The bones of the hip are often broken, and one can clearly see them move forward and backward when they heal; and the healing is good if they are set above and below where they were broken. The patient should lie on his face, then spread out his legs evenly; and it is when the fracture is well formed that the bones are separated.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one of the links goes towards the knuckle of the leg, and the other link goes to the root of the break; and if it is near the knee, then one of the links goes towards the knee and the other extends downward; then put the bones to their natural shape with your hands, and then set the plaster on them, and tie them together, except for the toes, because they must not be tied.
If there is an abscess, let it rest and then return to the work of healing and curing; the time required is according to this method. It is necessary that you wrap the break in .i. a hard cloth twice in .ij. or .iij., and wait for the excess to dry, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the birth, and bind .i. a long thread between the buttocks and the leg, leaving the knee out, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and the buttocks the cloth, then put stakes on the break, and put one stake on the bone of the leg; then employ the space left between the leg and the buttocks of drapes to make the bandage even, then begin to tie in .iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and as you go up the break, and less the bandage; then enter the .ij. stitches that you have bound between the leg and the buttocks, and tie .iij. stakes that are above, then return to the knee of the head of the thread, until you come away from the foot; and let the bandage be if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then k'it does not come back an abscess or swelling or any other sign.
And if it should happen, if it loosens and turns this way or that way as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that it holds, if necessary, they should be removed; and if they cannot be removed, the joint should be split and pulled out forcefully; and the cure should be made as we have said, until it is healthy.
And never is the buttocks broken in this way that we put stakes, as in the aid or arm; however, in the restoration made in this way it does not ring the patient.
And know that the cook is recovered after one day, or less or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
of the gangrenous wound
For in the gangrenous wound there is sometimes a little fracture, but it often bleeds many times. And if it fractures, it is only a small hole or pit, and has many holes, and feels good.
And the healing is such that one who is torn on both sides should be made whole again, as much as possible; then apply plaster, and put a smooth wooden splint, if you need it, and adjust it as described for other fractures, including the hot and cold treatments and other things mentioned; also apply treatment to each injury as necessary, until they are healed.
from the break of the leg
that in the leg is .ij. bones, so that one is called by right not "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and there is all the same break as it comes to the arm, and for this the restoration is as that of the arm evenly, and the work is all i.
And if both bones are broken together, so turns the leg on all sides.
And if the small bone is broken, so it turns in front.
And if the large bone is broken, so that it is felt to be painful and seen well; then turn back to the dislocation. Then bring extension, and make it equal, and tie the stars equally; but nevertheless, it is appropriate that the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, that the extension is less and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, then take 19.2 pieces of long, smooth wood that cover the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in 19.2 bandages above and below, and bind this to the limb, and at this binding place the leg should not decline towards the right or the left, and so it is good; and no one administer 1.9.2 pieces of long wood, and if it is smooth, and put the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break or where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, in order to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; cure as long as it is healthy.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but the bone of the foot comes in one break and two times, and it has never happened that it comes broken except in many conditions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones surmounting one another, so put this patient like a stone on the earth, also as if he wanted to walk, then now put your foot on his side, where the bones are raised up, then press them until they go back into their places; then apply the plaster and hammer it down, and tie with a small rope a piece of cloth weighing about 4-5 pounds, then secure it to the front of the foot, then you have wrapped your drapes and other things that you need.
And when three days or four have passed, then remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, then restore them, as we said for the hand; then place on the broken foot an stake according to its length, and make it a little wider, then put on the foot that little cloth that I mentioned, and hold it forward; and if there are more than one or two broken, each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I said for the others who are broken, as soon as we have said; and help each accident as it deserves.
from breaking of the bone of the shoulder joint
When the nature of the woman is broken, if she is seated enlarged, then lean her to the back part of the spine, and hold her behind; then fill the cavity of the nature with cotton, and also put in it as much as i.i. a stone; then turn the woman, and gently press the spine little by little, and then take out the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she urinates, if the stone is taken out, and when she has finished urinating, put it back again, and so make 30 days or more: then will be restored the break, and she will die, take a bladder of buckthorn, and tie a cord to the hernia, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow in the cord making shapes, until the bladder is gone inside: the nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use thereupon, and listens to my book. For the break signifies many things to the right way of restoration: hear it then.
In the hernia, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and pour it into the hernia; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it like that for .iij. days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the chest or shoulder or similar, to be healed at this time, so that the wounds that we have spoken about serve as testimony.
And if the wound heals, unless there is another matter, then begin to restore the fracture in this same hour, or that day, so that the aphorisms do not come again.
And if the aphorisms come again, unless you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the aphorisms are calm, and do not touch them or at any time on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the leathery skin uncovered, so that you put it to rest lightly with your hands, at small extension.
And if the extensions are not equal to your hands, then put it to rest lightly with this iron instrument, which has .vij. or .viij. inches long and the thickness is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this purpose use three or four drops according to what it needs in each cure of a break; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your ovraige, and be sharp before and thick in the middle forward:
And this is called a "palainche", because the broken head of the bone must be placed on top of the bony tip; and it should be struck once, until it heals, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is slight, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut off the tip of the bone, until the instrument can take hold of it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, cut it with a suitable instrument, or chisel or file, at your command; and resect what is delayed in the bone with small incisions.
And when the jaw is brought back together, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then wet.i. a drape in red wine vinegar, and make sure it is clean; and do not put it on the wound with wax or anything else where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer leeches when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be well assured that the wound will not be constricted with the fracture; and many times this has been done, and they have brought upon the patient death or corruption without fail; and the ligatures are softer and less sore than those of other fractures.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that bad accident will not come, since we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not good to put on leeches; but wrap around, instead of leeches, hard drapes, and tie them. And when you see after.i. a day or  .ij. days whether Bowen comes to the wound, if oste that which you have put on all over with wine, and put on ointment healing wounds, as ointment tetrafarmaciton and similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the members are dislocated in such a way that the bow moves downward lightly.
And if the pain persists, and he cannot join together but comes back together with a bow, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you open the wound with care, and take out all these painful pieces.
And if the fistula appears at the place, or any other corruption, it is necessary that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the chest or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not pull it out, because many die if you do so; but leave it until it rots; then, after xx days or xxx, cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of bruses that come from the sudure
We come again and again after the health of the broken member, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot do its natural work.
Take care therefore that we come again and again after the health of the broken member, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot do its natural work.
For when the bone is healed, and stays after weak and fragile members, it is for many reasons: because it was too tied up, and was not tied up as it should have been; or because it had too many ties, and could not get the right amount of movement to the member; or because of many inflammations; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
And the cure is such that you make the patient eat, and make the frame soft, until the bones multiply within him; and administer bath, and give pleasure and rest; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts to his great thirst, and wet it often with fresh water, until the thirst passes into the member; and return to its natural shape.
the wounded limb after sickness
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that we must break the member all over again, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and they bring about great harm and even death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is convenient that they be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften them are cooked, as foiles de vismalve, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a poultice of softening stuff, such as well-made astringent, and take the musk of vismalve, and confit it with butter or oil of sesamum, and make a poultice thereon; or you take fat figues, and crush them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And never is the bone moved for rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement to the member every hour.
And if the deformity is rigid and hardened, as in a stone, it needs to be opened with fire, covering up to the bone, with a sharp, light knife; and put on poultices and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it now brings back sensitivity to touch.
For if we delay, and the veins swell, and by chance we put them back to their place; for so it is not convenient that we move them when they are swollen: many times such a thing brings spam and other pains;
However, when this happens, if we make the patient well, then let us leave it, as long as the abscess is relieved; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
And I have ordered the treatments for dislocations of the shoulders until they are completely healed.
The jaws.
Here is the translation of the text:
When the dislocations are small, they are brought back by these eight dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must take it back to the hospital immediately, and do not delay.
and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the sick person with a little water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands are far away, so that they remain even; and instruct the patient to let his jaws become soft, and move them in all directions.
And he holds the mirror up to nature, as long as it remains in its place.
And if it returns, surely the two jaws are together, and if they arise from cold water and oil, as long as you gently re-set them; do not delay in setting them back, as we have said.
And when they have been gently re-set and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a softener, if you put it on drapes soaked in oil and wax made from oil and wax, then gently remove it;
and let the sick person sleep on their back, and their jaws be between the two knees, so that they do not move or make an effort to open wider, but eat soft food, as long as the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer painful.
and then cut what needs to be cut lightly, and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandible is well tied and healed.
If the two mandibles cannot be set back in place within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and usual sore throats come about, and by chance belly-ache, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many times he who had it died in XVII days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from the cost over the abdomen and the pelvis, and is dislocated only once towards the rear, and it is felt well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down slowly on his back, and extends his arms; and then press upon the joint with your palm, and it will return; then put the plaster and the bandage on, and hold it fast;
and the shoulder that is over the neck cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated only once, then he returns to his place, as we have said; then put the plaster and the bandage on, and hold it fast, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
and thus also is returned the shoulder of the spear, when it is taken out of its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
is dislocated except for two ways: one is that it dislocates to the part of the shoulder blade from its place; and the second is to the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates to the part above, and this happens little.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the ribs; and many times it dislocates forward toward the shoulder blade, but at these who have little money, because at them the wound is made very big, so they go to hospital; and at those who have enough money, the wound is small, and they go back home.
And by chance some men have a blow or break, and breaks the shoulder blade with a hot apothecium; and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary for you to test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And is known to dislocations when it turns down towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the diseased and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and remove the shoulder from the neck at the head of the shoulder, just as it were a ball; and the patient cannot move his arm to its side, nor make any movements.
and also, if it has dislocated upwards, it is then hidden, because you can clearly see it at the base.
and this manner of dislocation is not always to be brought back, when it is new, or the disease has seized him.
And the way is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick person above, then put your thumbs down on the shoulder, and force the joint up to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, because it puts itself away; so come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the hands of days later, then it is convenient that the sick person be bathed in warm water; and the minister gives a soothing and soft preparation, as if an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and is given;
and then the sick person is to be laid on his back, and a sheet of equal size is placed over the shoulder a little too soft or a little too hard, then the minister places the heel of his hand on the sheet, and holds the head of the shoulder firmly, and pulls the hand of the sick person;
and others ministers teigneth the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once, and thou seest if you reset it according to this manner:
and so you make present  .i. a man who is greater than the patient; and let it be right toward the side of the cost, and bottle up this shoulder from the axis of the patient, and lift up the axis toward heaven, so that the patient hangs by his armpit; and others ministers pull down the patient's arm from below his abdomen. And if the patient is too light, then pull with it something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And the reset can be done also in this other manner: and is that you make   .i. long piece of wood on the ground, whose axis is also as a   .i. pistol, and is not too big nor too small; And then put the sick person in a warm bed, but let there be a blanket over him, and the sick person be standing long-winded; then extend his hand upstream on the other side, so that the joint will come back to its place firmly.
And if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood from the arm of a great oak tree, two hands and three feet wide, which has the head standing on the edge so that it can enter into perfect dislocation in order according to this form:
And then place it on the top of the wood, so that the sick person is not hurt, and then put it under the shoulder; and extend your arms above the long arm, and then place the aid on the wood, and the hand at the head, and then set the hand on a step of a stone, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now be back in its place.
And when it is back in place, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a piece of wool that is even; and then set the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and ash of thorns, on all the shoulder and around, then draw it out of the shoulder before, and tie the bandage onto the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
And it is necessary that he drinks little, so that the members are comfortable, for they will heal sooner; and then drink more after 3 or 5 days, and move them; and if they are stiffened and are not softened, then they are healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture which has come or because of another cause, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterization to 3 quarters, as it was described earlier or with the paste of the cauterization.
And if you do all this, and after 5 days the joint still does not hold and the arm cannot raise it, then you will know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is dislocated or stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint has never been put back in its place.
The dislocation which is around the loins and the breasts, or behind them, is made by impact, and extending of the hands, and I apply another place; and treat as long as they are healed.
And if after healing comes the greyness of the member, and it is slow to move again, then the patient uses it many times until that greyness is healed, and returns to its original nature.
of dislocation from the shoulder
Sache that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at its ends and returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the sound, if you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you bring it back in this way as the abscesses are dry, because if the abscesses are wet, then it would be painful to bring it back; and by chance can not be brought from all and everything, especially when it is behind; so much worse than other dislocations, and is of great pain, and by chance comes death.
And the restoration is done, when it is so that you can bring it back, that you extend her hand to your 2 hands; and her arms are spread out, and the hands from the wrist according to the neck between, behind and in front, and push the joint into its sheath together, or at the root of her palm, until she regains her place.
And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand to its root, and turn it which is dislocated behind.
And if it does not return to its place, then give strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and dip them two ministers, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, and because you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth.
and when he sets his hand to the joint with oil to soften it, then put the joint back in place until it heals again;
and when it is in place, put plaster on it dry with honey and extract the form, and raise the arm of the patient at the shoulder, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is stable in place, then release it, and if you see that the joint does not move well, then restart the plaster and the bond, and leave it for a while until it is firmly set, then release it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and gently massage it, and press until it is relieved; or put a sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it. a day and a night, then wash and dry it out, and let it enter or bathe; and when he goes, he rubs the joint gently then puts it back on, and then enters or bathes; and thus does 19 times or 20., until he is well; and if you see, put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it up; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocation of the hand should be reset as soon as possible, even while it is still dislocated, so that its place is not lost; and likewise, if there is swelling, or if there is heat.
and if you put the injured hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and then reflect upon it; so that it puts its palm against the joint, and presses it down until it comes back to place.
All the same, it is necessary that you check if he is in the right position; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and you look at it; put your hand on that appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
If not, then he incises the abscesses gently, and lets it go like this.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then wait for the joint to heal.
and does not work for the patient as long as his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything: so you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other device for extracting them except by using a delicate cautery, and perhaps nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, he puts it on the plaster that we have described, then he extracts and leaves it alone for a while, then he unties it and leaves it like this.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, if the moist hot water, and rub until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the two hands
None
Then hold the two together and press the joint toward the part where it is joined;
and then leave it for a while and then set it back in place; and then remove it again, so that he can move it, and put it back in place, and do this often, until it is tight,
and do the same thing if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is well; and do the same thing if it is dislocated on the other side.
I will do my best to translate this text line by line as you requested. Please note that I am not a medical expert, so if there are any mistakes or ambiguities in the translation, it is recommended to seek clarification from a qualified professional. Here is my translation:
When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, there may be multiple dislocations if not properly treated, for this leads quickly to death for the patient."
And the signs are that the swelling suddenly stops without a trace, cannot be held, and often all members or two arms or one leg become soft."
And often the shoulder becomes mute in three parts; that which becomes mute at the back is called "gilboiste".
the cure is that if you have a hunched back, it came from childhood; if there is no cure or recovery of all things.
And that which comes from sitting down, or from strikes, or from similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words, by which there was no great benefit;
but I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the hunched back that comes before the pit, there is neither medicine nor healing;
and so I say that what comes straight in one side, and not from the back, for it is this which can be properly cured:
is laid down on its back in an even position, and has a poultice applied to it so that it does not burn:
then place 1 stake on the ground in front of it, and another above it, and bind a string around the head of the patient with one end at the feet and the other at the knees:
and the two ministers know the strings, one on the head and the other on the feet, between the two stakes:
and are firmly shut, the twig as we have said, and the mirrour sets its palms on the spine, until it revives.
And if it does not recover with this cure, then take a bucket of  .iij. arms long, and shave the wall with it, and place the patient on one side, and pour the water from the top of the bucket onto the spine, then put the middle of the bucket on the spine; and place the mirrour's palms on the other top of the bucket, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see that it does not come back, then do so with the turner which turns the hand.
And this is that you fix  2.iij. torches to the head of the patient with a long arm, and put between each torch, above and below, a palm of space of length;
and let each branch be firmly rooted in the ground so that it does not move; and between each of them place one branch which turns with it, and let each turn have two small branches which come together, so that the turn can be turned by them.
and then place the link between the assistants at the turn towards the top, and the other link towards the tips on the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn to all of the link, and the master puts the spike equally as we have said.
And when it is equal, put it on desiccate with a lot of uff, and then the stipes, and then the stele of a tablet of 1.3 inches in length, that by purple the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine sound, then the thread of a link, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle fasting, until it is healthy;
and if in the end nothing comes of the health, then administer mild and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said before; and do not give a piece of lead,
and never comes the appearance in the back of the spine between the shoulders, and feared that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, so that one should not have presumptiveness: perhaps it would bring about death.
of the hip joints
Saiches that the hip and shoulder joints come out only as dislocations, not at all like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to: .iiij. parties: inside and outside , in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is more distant and opens more the joints of the sick than those of the healthy, and cannot bend the sick knee on fire; and it is this limb which is swollen from an abscess, because the head of the shoulder comes from it.
And the sign of that to which it belongs, if this accident is opposite to those before.
And the signs of that to which it belongs, if it is well bent according to its nature; however, there is no double knee pain, and if one makes it walk, it cannot go forward, and retenes its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it goes on the heel.
And the signs of that to which it belongs, if it cannot extend its knee, nor double, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the shoulder is at the expense of the ribs.
Here is the translation of the text:
And for those who have recently been dislocated, and there are 23 ways to be dislocated, if you hurry to reset the joint, turn it back in, make it firm again, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back, and no other cure is needed.
And if it does not come back in this way, you must provide strong assistance with one minister, and firmly hold the leg between two hands, or tie it to the knee with a ligature: and with other ministers extend a hand above in such a way that they support each other's hands, then tie the ligature onto the hip; and another minister ties the knot of the ligature:
and extend up and down all at once, as long as the sick person is raised from the ground at one time, and remains so.
This manner of extension is common to three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If that is not the case, then you should put the sick person's back on the ground. When the dislocations are in the neck, if it is conveniente to make the patient lie on his side, then place the bandage on the root of the jaw, and let the knot be at the angle of the mandible, then extend the bandage upward toward the angle, and upward again;
Then pinch the patient's arms, and embrace the large knot of the ill jaw, and extend it to the side: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot do this in the way that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong thong over the .ij. heels, and over the .ij. knees, so that the sick leg be extended more than the other two.
Then hang him by the neck from a beam, and let his feet be 12 feet off the ground; then order 1 minister to grasp the lower part of the loins, and let others hang with the sick man who grasps the loins firmly, because the joints will then return quickly.
And when the dislocation is on the outside, lie down with the patient as we have said in that which concerns gilisheit, and remove 1 thong from the sick leg properly, and also from the foot.
Then put 2 torches on the head and 1 between the loins of the patient; then put 1 torch under the feet of the patient. and let him plant wet cloths inside, so that it does not burn the patient; then each minister extends towards him, and the master places it at his side equal to the dislocation.
If it comes back, that's good. If not, put it on the table and press it in the way we said in the dislocation, and lay the patient on his back.
And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the leg that is in pain slowly; and according to what I said; and put the master's hand on the leg that is in pain, then press with the other hand, and lift it up towards the hip.
And if the dislocation is on the side, if it is not necessary to extend the leg that is in pain slowly; and do not lift it up towards the ground, but rather it is necessary that he be placed on his side as we said before bed on the two hips. and extend it above his face, and the link stretched out as we have said before, and should be pressed down on the joint to the table;
and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then insert the pegs, and put on the plaster, and pull it with a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
and rest for three or four days, then take off the bandage and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, then stretch it out, as before, and leave it. three or four days; then take off the bandage, and let him walk loudly, until the members are comfortable.
of the dislocation due to old age
The dislocations are issued from none of the joints of its place, por coi he cannot move, and is the members misfigure, and sent the sick great pain and great injury.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not extend it to the knee, know that he is dislocated;
and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees;
then take his knee at your palms, and draw back between the two, then bend the .iij. ribs from the knee forming; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he extends his leg lightly to the knee;
and bandage it with plaster, and make the leg rest in the hip, and fasten them together tightly. iij. jors or iiij., then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, so administer an extension firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
the heels are never dislocated, and they are never completely displaced inward or outward.
And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out of joint:
If they ram it, it is light, and one must stretch it lightly with their hands when it is only slightly bent.
And when it has come out completely, so that you make the patient sit upright, and tie him up with a blanket across his body, except for the leg, above the ankle;
then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, once, and then stretch it up, and blow on the foot up top;
and do this .ij. times, if as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, then begin again the work, for it will come back;
and if it cannot come back like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and wrap a drape around it, so that he does not hurt the patient;
then place the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a .i. band, so that he lies on the shoulder of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and place the staff close between the knees of the patient to hold the patient in place while they are being extended;
and then make the dislocated limb equal with your hands, and other ministers will dip the healthy leg in the brine, and the dislocation will come back entirely.
And when it is firm, then put on the plaster and tie it up, and form the support, and fix the foot to the leg, and guard against the straps being too tight;
Then leave it for .ij. days or .iij., and if the support needs to be adjusted, then adjust it after the third day, and don't let the patient walk until the fourth day; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if there is an abscess, if it needs to be calmed down as we said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
of the two
When the two are dislocated, if they are gently extended without work, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the back of the neck or foot, if it needs to be sat on a flat surface or a table, and put your foot on what opens up these joints, then press with your foot as far as it comes back;
and when it is even, and there is nothing open, so put the sole of the foot on a table for .ij. shoulders, then strain it by forming, and leave it .iij. days, then undo; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
for wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one tries to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be hasty:
and use at the beginning of things soothing anus, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if I put the member back in place now, so that the anus comes quickly;
and when the member is in place, then administer soothing anus, and cure the wound, if necessary, with dry ointments;
and if there is a dislocation with fractures, and broken bones, do as we have said for simple illnesses;
and you keep from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cause you to miss according to your Creator, and for the sake of protecting your arm and your heart. Amen
