O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the essence of medical science, together with its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is strange from all sides, it is very difficult to find the science and knowledge, and it is not delayed by the force of the hands except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And from this comes error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and knowledge is alienated.
Or I think that I will make it alive together with the order of this physician according to the path of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the tools of cautery, and the other instruments of the work, with the assistance of the explanation and preparation of it, as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the shapes and connections and separations of the nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and their number, and the movement and the veins that move and those that rest, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason, as Hippocrates says, "The non-existent is not with the existent, and with work it is small, and most of all in the art of hands."
We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is not familiar with the things mentioned above, he may fall into error and harm others; so that I have repeatedly seen many of those who engage in this science and, abandoning their knowledge and experience, are lost.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scalp or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another foolish man who was leading a stone-worker's son by the hair; and the boy was very big, so he took a piece of his bladder and killed him in three days.
And I have also seen a man called Lou the Tacker; and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and if they had tacked him, he would have died.
And see another case which came for treatment. i. a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant, pulled out the break over the wound as he bandaged it tightly, leaving no scar, and left it so. And he ordered that it should not be removed; and it waited so long that the leg completely withered away and the bones came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the way to corruption was confirmed or member, and he could not make it well; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the members were completely lost.
And see another case which came for treatment. i. an abscess which was putrefied, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
For chancre, when it is purred of melancholy humor, there comes no other way than to touch it with iron if it is not in its right place so that one can take away all that is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each division of this book where there is fear and danger.
For this reason, you must keep this secret so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that, through the grace of God, you come to salvation and are healed; and ward off your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and believe in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien warns against some of his advice: "Do not take care of any bad disease unless you are called foolish."
I have devised this treatise according to the following three chapters.
The first chapters are on fire cauters and medical waters, and the final chapter is on the forms of instruments, the tools for cauterizing, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is on shaping and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the final chapter is on ordering and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torques and similar things; and it is ordered that the loins be stretched up to the chest, and that the forms of the tools be defined.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I give the quality of help and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and the secret answers to it; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree upon it; and I lack words for these, for they are long.
I say that fire cautery helps all complexions where there is matter; namely, hot-tempered people who have dry matter and cold-tempered people who have wet matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some agreed and said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is of no help to disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of hot disease by heat, nor of dryness by dryness; and he who said the opposite, that cautery does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man with his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it by experience.
And every path, does not interfere but he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the cauterizing ointment, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and the space of time; of other complexions we have no fear, even if they are cold and moist diseases. And all this will come together and agree with the cauterizing.
And know, children, that a fire cautery all at once so that it is secret and helpful to the cure, and of greater goodness than an aromatic medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and comes not forward but to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member as much as it can.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and bring illnesses of great healing to the member, and sometimes they cause sickness.
Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not burn, unless there is an excess of it.
And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, which is hidden from men, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should be made at the time of the moon's quarter-phases; and let them be said.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all seasons, for because the sudden harm resulting from the aid of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot wait until the season when greater harm may come to the limb.
And I don't think ever, son, as they do so; for in the illness that is healed by cauterization there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they believe, since cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine because of its haste in effecting its value, and for its greatness and dignity.
And it may happen that the illness comes not according to the complexion of the sick person and his place of illness and its virtue; and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not that cauterization is administered in the place where he has a little excess of moisture, so as to do away with pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens less.
And yet few people understand that fire cautery is a form of medicine, and this is evident; but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their understanding is wrong, and fire cautery is a form of medicine because when we administered methods of cure for various diseases and they did not work, then we administered fire cautery, and it worked. Therefore, understand that fire cautery is a form of medicine, not because of the intentions of foolish people.
The ancient ones said that gold cautery tools are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated that the quality and purity of gold makes it superior; they also said that the heat of gold does not cause corruption, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does work; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
And know that when you heat gold tools, you do not recognize when they are too hot due to the color of gold, and they often cool down soon; and if you heat them too much; then put them in the fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or you shall read this chapter up to the point where the vision is clearer so that you may find it easier to locate.
The olive oil cautery
The olive oil cautery
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purified with a solvent medicine, which will remove the pain in 3.3 or according to what the virtue and freshness and the habit of the sick person can bear; and then apply the medicine to the head of the sick person.
And then put the cross between your hands, and place his hands on his feet; after that place the roots of your two palms on the roots of his two feet between his .ij. toes; and as soon as you come to him, let him bleed a little, then heat the cautery which is called "oliver", from which this form is:
And put it over the red mark, and make a small cut as you descend and remove his hand little by little while turning it; then let go of the joint, and rub the joint until you see the bone 1.1 small piece; and if you do not see it, then start the cautery as soon as you see the bone as I told you; after that take 1.1 piece of silk, and put soft cotton in it, and put on the mark, and leave it for 1.3 days; after that put moistened cotton on it; and let it be until it is hot enough to see the bone; then cure the wound with an ointment called "tetrarchal formula", until it is healed.
And say the old one that the longer the wound is open, the more it will be purified; and for this reason if you are in a hurry.
And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much part of the bone is burned, and then release what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And another said that one should let the cautery burn so much as a woman puts her finger in her cunt to let the humors come out, and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must cure and patch it up.
And these 2 methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all respects except that they might be useful in some men who have a tendency to fear; and I think that I should let them burn, for the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even more so when the joint of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first application of cautery seems to me to be safer and milder, and from this I practice cauterizing in a way that will bring about healing.
for the pain in the head
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Pay attention so that the patient's head is of strong nature and is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery quickly as we have said above.
After applying the fire cautery to each horn of the head, as we have said above, and applying the same cauterizing liquid called "vaselz"; then place the vinegar; and arrange your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain in this cauterization is much greater than in the others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary for the horns to be smaller than those on which we cauterize the scalp, and this is the form:
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. When suddenly in one part of the head there is pain and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleansed with medicinal drugs, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not benefit: then make cauterizations according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
When making a water medicine cauterization, take a piece of bark and peel it back and cover it with .i. poc as many times as there are joints, and then apply the temple where the pain is in a partial way that you can dip the bark into the oil; and when it has been dipped, let it lie and tighten well and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with fresh bark, and leave the wound like this for .iij. days or two days; and then put cotton soaked in butter on it until it is healing well.
After the oil treatment until it is well healed; and if you see that fire medicine may be useful, which I have written about or second healer of burning drugs.
The fire cauterization: Heat the cautery so that it is according to this manner:
Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or there is little of the collar, and in the middle of a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and take your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur espés is burnt; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and run an abundance of blood.
de emigr
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nous avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que le cautere devant dis de la médecine et du fer ne lui soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est appelé "cultellare" tant qu'il soit blans; et signe ainsi sur le lieu douloureux une ligne de demi doigt de long, et osté ta main une fois, et l'estrains que tu ne coper l'artere et que ne viennes jusqu'à l'os; et te garde de la mandibule qui mute quant on mords, et le ner n'ait regart que la mutation et que les spasmes ne viennent maladement, et te garde de la décomposition du sang de l'artere lorsqu'elle est copée, ou copée ait grand peur et surtout à celui qui ne s'en konoit, et qui n'est ni étudiants ni éprouvés; et laisse l'œuvre en mi voie; mais je vous dirai comment on retient le sang lorsqu'l'artere est copée, et je vous montrerai au livre où il afiert en ce traité.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the neck too as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization which we have said or the chapster of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing knife that has .ij. blades; and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
for pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ears due to cold occurs, and one has applied the solute medicines and other treatments which we have mentioned in the division of this chapter, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cauterization which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
After puncturing all around the ear on the sick side, or around the two sides of the ear where the pain is located, and moving away from the root of the ear a little bit as you have marked the spot; make .x. punctures around each ear; after that, treat the spot until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
which must be cured by cauterization is not strong except for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things which come from dryness and waste of semen.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves with fluid from thirst and purging of the head and gargling, and that is not worth it, then you should apply three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further away in the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and place the cautery in the healthy part, and let it burn for half the time; and this is the form of the cautery:
And is the form of the scalpel that we have put forward, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker; after cure the place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, so then do 22 cauterizations: 16 on the two horns of the head, and 1 each where it is called "vesselz", just as we have said above, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured just as we have said above.
of lime
This text describes a treatment for a disease (perhaps cerebral hemorrhage or stroke) involving the use of lime to create a "lime plaster" for the head, followed by the application of a "saffron poultice" made from saffron and water, which is then placed on top of the lime plaster. The treatment is completed with a cauterization process, as described in the previous sentence.
If it is this way, it is good; and if it is not, then do 22 cauterizations of the scalp by going down to the base of the neck, and space out each cauterization by 1/2 inch; and the cure as we have said before, and if he still has fever, then do 1 cauterization in the middle; and if it is necessary, 2 others on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and be the cauterizations which are called "olive", as we have said above.
of the cold to warm the head of the patient, then wash it with water and salt as we have said before; then apply fire cautery to the head and to each horn, and behind and above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is strong, apply four fire cauterions to the spine of the back; and let it burn until the hair at the base is singed, and lift your hand; then cure as much as possible so that it is healed, and the cautery that is called "oliver" which we have said before.
from epilepsy
For those with a feverish reaction to fire cautery, it is necessary to first warm the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the chapter where the patient is very ill and suffering from feverish reactions to fire.
And if it is a child who cannot bear the fire, he makes gargling and chewing to clear the throat with bone meat; after him, he takes the head in the middle, and does 1.i. cautery according to what we have said before, and 1.i. cautery on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is far away and suffering, he does cauterizations as I said to that who has paralysis and softening of the spine, on the back bone and the neck, and let the cauterizations be olive according to the manner which I said.
If the patient is a child, he does 1.i. subtle cautery according to this manner:
When, by the cause of melancholy, there are excesses or corrupt humours and thick fluid, then the half-cautery which we have said to that who has paralysis:
And if, by the cause of melancholy, there is decline in the excesses towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he does something to refresh the brain according to what it is before in the division:
After cutting the head of the patient; after making .i. tortois shell out of fine linen, also as .i. circle, put it under the head; and the patient's face should be crossed and held firm from all sides; then present the liniment, and cover it with old sheep's butter; and heat the fire moderately, so that it can be endured by the patient; after filling the shell inside the head, and letting it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with other good government, until he is well.
Or if you want to cauterize the wound by making several punctures all around it. This way of cauterizing dries up the brain a bit; and then put cotton wetted in butter and in lard on top.
of the eyes When the signs come first as eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient purifying thing the head, and the guard of all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples si li dessendemens de l'awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.
After he has ordered his head to rise, and made a fire cautery on the head, and made .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if he is dislocated from the jaw; or if in the dislocation the jaw comes out of its socket, all the cauterization should be done on the veins and arteries that are behind the cheekbones, and the cautery should be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood come out, then stop it with a cloth as you have.
And two cor des larmes
For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic surplusage, then he does the fire cautery that I said at the beginning of the aweth: 1 cautery emmi le chief, et 2 cauteres sus les 2 temples, et 2 cauteres ou haiterel desoz les 2 os; and if it has been necessary, if the cauterize well on the sorcil completely at all little cautere.
Of the tears of fire within the eyes.
Now, as for the remedies according to what we said in the division of the head, and it does not benefit, so then he drinks the evil poison; after that, he re-sets the head, and makes cauterization with olive oil; and he makes 2 cauterizations on the 2 scalds, a little on the hair; and you should guard against the artery that you do not cover. And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "Clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cauterization which is called "Olive" is made. Of which this is the form:
And if you see that the hair has grown as long as the scalp is, and let it not be cut except when the third part of the paper has been burned, according to the manner that I have said.
The hair that points to the oil No one has yet discovered that the hair of the oil is converted to the parched, and grasps the oil, and it is made on 1.1 ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your breast; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign that detaches the hairs; then put cotton wet in pitch and muskellaige of persillion on the oil, and heat up the cautery with which there is this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the healing is at the place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the height of the oil; then lift your hand up, and leave it so for  .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as the heating is done; after the cure of the wound until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same middle place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hair oil.
The medical hot cautery is that you order to the patient that he leaves the hairs as long as they are even and big, then make of parchment the shape of the furrow of mirth; then take French soap and lively salt, each one a  .Z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then pour on the shape that you have made like the furrow of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the illness holds in  .i. oil only, then work also in  .i., and if also in water; and put cotton wet in pitch; and the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If you have been ill for a long time, keep this medicine at your mouth. When the medicine has passed, lift up your chin and hold it up as if it had been lifted by a fire or an incision; and if this is so, that's good. If not, put the medicine back on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are long and even, and your nails are cut short; then put cotton soaked in oil over the sore spot called "dysentery" and other spots, until it heals.
And if you need to hold your chin well up so that it does not move from the medicine applied to your hairs; and if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair is pricked by the oil, then repeat the medicine on the same spot where the paper has become soft properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the oil dou mirte:
And know that the hair of men is different in length and thickness, and according to this your constraints; and do not reply the right path to anyone whose study is this art.
On the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit them, then you must apply cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the hair between your hands in a basin of water or wine juice over oil; then heat the cautery until it is red-hot: and apply it to the hair at the base, as if it were a feather; together, let the tip of the cauterium be directed towards the head, so that you do not burn the skin; but rather, let the fire be directed only at the hair.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the porosity, and drying it; and if it is closed, then operate, and seal it with fire; after which, place the hot cauterium firmly on the hair, and keep your hand away from the cauterium at the base of the hair, that your hand does not go wild; and place the cautery in the oil, and corrode it.
If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be better. If not, then start cauterizing again after one more day, and if you need to do so, and leave it .iiij. days; after that put cotton soaked in water on it until it is healthy, and for ten days after it is healthy, then put medicine with corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what comes out in his chapter.
And I have a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients spoke of. Understand fistula, and cut it; then put in the incision .i. subtle camahan so that this is the form: and I form it in quantity of a 1/4 of a pound; and hold your hand where the camahan is firmly, and do not move the patient at all so that the melted plonk does not run to its oil; and it comes if you put cotton soaked in water in a bowl or in a basin: the plonk so art the leu de fistule, and he heals with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to pierce the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what comes out in his chapter.
of the crevices in the lips the times when crevices form in the lips, which are called "hair", and most often on the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices with the treatment we have described in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical scalpel according to this form:
And place it firmly in the crevices as long as it comes out clean; after the cure, apply balm to the area until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the palate or the roots of the teeth, after causing pus and swelling and becoming hollow and infected; you treat it as we have said in the division, and it does not help: so you should use a fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; then you seal it or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of the hole, and behind it; and do this once or twice, after the treatment we have described, as long as he is healthy; and if he is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, you should discover the root and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and the tooth does not respond, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery, shape it so that you can put a wire on the tooth; place the cautery hotly inside the tooth, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the process according to your will; after filling the mouth with salt water, and keeping it there for an hour and rinsing it thoroughly.
And this is the way to treat those who were moving tightly, and the gums softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the teeth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold or sight, and medicine does not help, then there is a need for fire cauterization according to the following two ways: and fire cauterization with butter and fire cauterization with fire.
Fire cauterization with butter: Take butter from a vat and stick a small iron or gold wire into it; after that, take cotton and wrap it around the end of a needle, dip it in butter, and place it on the aching tooth carefully; hold it there until the butter cools; do this often until the power comes to the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become wet with butter, and put it on the tooth, and put on 1 iron wire as hot as possible until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
If the fire cautery is such that you squeeze a ferret-iron or an iron ring, and it's big so that the fire doesn't come to the mouth of the sick person; after warming the cauterizer, from which the form will come later, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer has cooled down; do this often, because the pain will be worse the next day or the day after. And it is convenient that the sick person fill his mouth with good fat in the haste of the cauterizer, and then wipe it off: and this is the form of the cauterizer.
When the scrofula is of pus and cold dampness, and does not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery tooth with which this comes later, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise from the cauterizer on the other side; and place the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or if it is small, place the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in that condition for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with garlic and tar as long as it is healthy.
When the moisture prevails over the chin, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by restorative medicines; after which make cauterization at the root of the throat, and guard against coming any further than the throat, and dare not kiss but a little. After making .i. another cautery to the jointure of the neck with the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called 'clavicle' from which we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the toast When all and disease of the mouth are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorbutic illness, and is an ancient disease, then one should make iij. cauteries on the forceps in his lips; and another cautery pour the juice between .i. two breasts; and let the cauteries be called 'clavicle' according to the form that is before said.
And if you see it, make cauterization in piercing all the cauterization that is called  'poins' from which the form is before in the disease of the ears; and let be the points up to .iii. or enqui entor. After cure the place according to what is before said, and let be the cauteries to .iij. rains according to this form:
And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it like this...
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lie down on their back and on their left side; then heat the cautery to .iij. ners and apply it to the joint as follows:
and cauterize the wound until it reaches the rib cage, and the form of the cauterization comes together with the cautery that has three nerves, because the nerve is according to the subtlety of a thread and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves:
And never apply to this one nerve because there are eight cauterizations.
After applying the fire cautery, treat with water; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well healed.
And if it is dislocated from above, let there be little pain, then apply cauterization to the thick cautery, or many cauterizations that pierce. Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the disease is cured.
To cure pneumonia.
To treat pneumonia, they say one should use roots of arnica, and in this way: take a long root of arnica, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and long as your two hands; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize. i.e., cauterize between the clavicle and the neck, and ii. small cauterizations a little down the side of the beard; and ii. cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, by leaning back a little; and i. cauterization under the breast, and i. another over the stomach, and i. between the shoulders, and ii. small cauterizations from the back, away from the shoulder; and do not squeeze your hand, but make an open gesture as if smelling something.
No older person said that anyone should use fire-like cauterization, and scratch and put it between the ribs, as much as it comes to the aphesis; and they say that one feels pain, as we have said in the aphesis of the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse of what we have said about the division of the treatments, and it does not benefit, then they devoted .ii. ways to cauterize that all are good.
Of which there is one way such that you make .ii. cauterizations, or .iii., in according to the length of the mouse, in according to the shape of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the mouse be sore on his back;
and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has 10 ners, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery where the mouse's cut comes from left to right, and let the elevatons that you feel where the mouse was cut be according to the length of his back, and the cauterization is according to the width of his back.
After that, the 10 ners are heated until the elevatons are felt from the other side, and then the cautery is taken away, and in doing so there will be .iii. ways. And if you see, then cauterize all of it with 10 ners. After the cure has been applied for a long time, and this will suffice that the other cure mentioned before is sufficient.
about gout
For gout, except in the manner called "asclepiades." When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment is of no use, then you should do .iiij. cauterization around the boude, and .i. on the stomach, and one on the liver, and .i. on the kidney, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and .i. on the testicles; and let the cauterizations be close to the cure.
Afterwards, keep the cauterization in place for a long time, and do not remove the treatment from the patient after the cauterization; and with God's help, healing would be quicker, and both of the two intentions would come together with God's aid.
The form of the cauterization for the stomach is the one that we have mentioned before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it has been described above.
of swelling of the fingers When the fingers are swollen in a person who is ydropical, and they are plain yellow, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index finger and the middle finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too much into it, so as not to force the yellow liquid, and make the cauterization according to this form:
After making 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the toenail; and let the cauterization be long, one behind the knee in front and the other behind, with the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without erasing, so that the awes are made; after curing the others we have said.
of the mansion
When the solution from the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and in the intestines are evaporated, and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so it is done. i.e. a great cautery on the stomach according to what he has talked about here before or the cautery of the stomach, the cautery circulates; and 2.iiij. cauteries around the navel gently to all i. cautery nailed gently, and 15 cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistors abound and the patient is suffering, make cautery on the wrist, and 1 cautery on each finger, and 2 small cauteries on the stomach, for this cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and damp corrupted humors, and are cured if as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, then 2.iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back, this who is completely outside almecdate little and little in triangulating, and 1 cautery on the buttocks; 2 dois
and if you think his stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swollen, then put great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse to all the cautery nailed; and leave the cautery open long time. After heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the gangrene which is called "thelul"
When you cope with gangrene, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on that gangrened coped; and leave it so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, where there is little movement; do this once or twice, and if there is more gangrene, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of beneficial herbs as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on alchatim, it will have greater help.
of a wound badly cured
When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening, which we will describe in detail, if there is a disease that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
When there is a fistula present, and it has become inflamed and has pus and moisture, if the disease can be completely cured with a precise cauterization, and you know exactly how much cauterization is needed; after that, warm the fire instrument which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the fire as many times as the amount of pus and corrosion that needs to be burned, once or twice or three times according to the quantity of the need; and be careful with the nerves that are in those places, and do not burn them unless they are furred; believe that they are not persisting; after that, cure those places until they are completely healed, and if the matter is not osteized [hardened], know that the disease has been cured entirely; and if the matter is osteized [hardened] at its base, know that the disease has been burned three-quarters of the way, and the bone has been corrupted at its base; and thus as one of these that we will describe in detail.
of kidney disease When there is pain in the kidneys, and a loud windiness, and it does not respond to women's remedies, then you must cauterize the kidneys from both sides with the clove-shaped fire instrument which we have described above; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be 2 [cloves] of fire on each side, and it will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to lack of urine and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then do a fire cautery in the region below the bladder, where the hair of the genitals encumbes, and so on both sides, and each cautery be as long as a finger; and do a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let the cauteries be carved according to the form described above.
of the mare (horse) When the mare is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their season is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: so it is necessary to do 11 cauteries in the region of the womb, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and 9 cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be carved, as we have said.
of the hips
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found in the department of the viscera, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at .i. a fire cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if so, let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make 3 large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cauterization be also perfect as all the others; and the cure until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hips When pain comes in the hip of the leg, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division [of treatment], and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purify the patient of the large humors with pills made from rotten substances, or other bad-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and the method of the cautery is according to .ij. methods: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to mout de ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip of the leg  .iij. triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a deep and large one, and between each cautery leave a space the size of a thumb, and let them be olive-colored; never do you make a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are  .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have just said before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the wound is burned.
And this is the method that we do in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach until the thigh or leg; and if it comes only until the thigh and leg, then you make   .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and   .i. cautery on top of the ankle  .iiij. times, a little to one side: and let the cauteries be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the wound burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the ankle, then you cauterize at the place where he feels the pain   .iij. points or   .iiij. according to the cautery that is called "points".
And if he is a man of trade, he does so much the better; and if he feels that the pain comes from the knee towards the thigh, he makes a cautery with a cuttle or circular knife, and you must take great care in all your cauterizations not to leave any of them so long as they are burning, and that you do no greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the sole of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely gone, and even the bones, and it became perverted and corrupted all the way through. After a dissolution of the entrails, which killed him.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this way. // And the wise said in the cautery of the ankle, that it is the manner, make a piece of iron and be at the head as well thick as a nail of finger, or a little less, and be between the intertruses and also from the one intertruse to the other space the quantity of a nut of nail; and let the intertruses be over of two parts, and are also like nails, and there is each piece of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be heated so that it is all red and put on, and then put it on the box of the bad ankle, and turn it on the lower back rib; and the cautery once 1 cautery burn and leave 2 days; and then make plaster with oil, and let the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its smell, and few use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts.
of the two
When pain comes to the back, either from rubbing or from impact or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, no one of these appearances is worth a cure, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is appropriate that after this person has voided the foul pills or other things, one should apply to his back, where the pain is, three lines of three inches long, and in each line make the cauterization according to the cauterization which is called "poins"; and if you see, make 1.5 cauterizations or 2.0 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maitre, many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of trouble are that they have a tight spine when they stand up and are afraid; and you find in the back of the neck and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
When you see this, and when you have healed it, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
So that the fire is equally red hot on each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with fire piercing 10 or 15 lines, and let the points be close together. After curing it, as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not use the fire in girder-making which is made of nerve-spines.
of the joints
When the joints ache because of moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the doctors properly call "rheumatism," and when it is a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicine, then it is cured by cauterizing in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery follow this form:
When it is necessary to strike at the root of the foot, make a fire cautery on all the cauterization that one claims "point." And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make a cautery on each knee with three cauterizations or four on each part, following the whole olive cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold the fire hard except when the root of the pain is burned.
And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make 16 points around the knuckles; and if there remains any pain in the two joints, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and give him medicines. For if you do this well and purify the flux, he will be healed with the help of God.
from the rupture of the syrup
When the rupture comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the loins and is new, so it is necessary that when you look at him to cure, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after this let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the bowels are repaired, and bring them to your sides, and sign of a half-circle above the navel with one hand; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
as soon as the bowels come down to the loins and is new, so it is necessary that when you look at him to cure, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after this let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the bowels are repaired, and bring them to your sides, and sign of a half-circle above the navel with one hand; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and that of old people also great according to their measure; after iii days cure his hair with oil as long as he is healthy, and make him lie down for 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his rinsings be refreshed for a long time, so that the bowel does not come out when he goes to bed.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and change it every .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against too loud yelling; and when he does this teaching, then he is completely cured. And I will say here later the cure of the barber in his chaplet. Of a rupture from the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third be cured; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at the cautery's three angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the top of the belly and make a line on its width over the rupture, and another behind, and your hand all around the whole cautery; But the first cauterizations are lighter and more tender.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, or of sitting or of hurting, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that he be burned at the fire called "poins", and let the burnings be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain. If he is cured with the first burning, it is good; otherwise, begin another burning on that one, for such a custom is that it must move to the member that is nearest, so that you must make the burnings until the patient is cured.
of meals
of meals
And if he feels pain everywhere, and it becomes obvious, then you should cauterize him with these cauterizes that we have described at the head, i.e. cautery in his nose, and ii cauteries on the spine of the neck, and vii cauteries on the spine of the back, and i great ones on the skull, and another delight on the shoulder, and ii cauteries on the shoulders, and ii cauteries on the sides, and ii cauteries on the bones of the hand, and on the pits of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are under his feet, so that you do not burn them, and never make any cautery on the bone of the knuckle, nor another on the bone of the stomach, nor another on the liver.
And know that the more I make cauterizes, the more I help and benefit him; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterize as much as a healthy person feels it, because his body is already very corrupted. And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the form of iron. After curing him, let him eat flour of times with honey and other cures until he is healed.
of
When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then heal with ointments until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is osted the swelling; and nevertheless does not interfere if he is not familiar with members and outlets of moving nerves.
of defenses
When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a fine cauterizer according to the size of the flesh, until the blotch is osted and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils, mixed with roasted oil and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almonds, each in parts; and mix them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the affected area until it is healed.
For the cure of leperous disease by fire
When the sore begins to appear, and you keep your eyes open, if you cauterize it with a cautery which seems a circle, go all around the edge of the sore. And yet, there are those who say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the sore; and yet, I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it done before; and it is better that it be cauterized all around, with a cautery called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
of the fever which cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or because of the excess of blood that it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the heat of the disease when he is very hot, and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize him all around with small cauterizations by poking; after which let him be. For she will hurry to die.
And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, making the cautery very hot, then:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has not finished healing, and make it such a cauterization that the patient feels relief in one way or another so that the course of the corruption is chosen. After the cure until he is perfectly healed.
The cure with fire by iron
Another way of a disease called "corrodens", and is no more than a member putrefaction, for it corrupts the members as the fire dries them up. If you see this disease in its early stages and can use cauterization with fire, then heat the nails carefully, large and small, according to what suits the place of the disease; after cauterizing all around until you have removed all corruption, and nothing remains but the corroded members themselves, which are burnt up by the fire. And then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire heal, and all corruption is removed. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, start again the cauterization on those which are still corroded. And this putrefaction is never cured with medicinal oil instead of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure with medicinal oil in the division: take it when you need it.
of radishes which come from the ground
Mouth of times there is that the hairs by default grow a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a gross thing seeded which bleeds the foot. And the cauterizations of this disease are as follows: .ij. ways. That is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization. Fire cauterization is such that you heat up .i. cauterization tool like a vulture's beak, and it must be made of good iron in the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it has fine margins; then place it all hot on the nail, and bring your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the base; and leave it so .iij. days until it starts to rot; then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with water, and leave the ointment on all night, and let the nails dry up and will be rooted from their roots. Then cure the wound with salt as much as it is healthy.
And if the body is converted by default, and many times are put on hands and feet, it is appropriate that you bring fire cauterization; and this is a third way: take an iron or metal wire, or a vulture's beak, and place it on the nail and the athelous part, that is to say, make warts; then place the wire on so that it bleeds all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the wire comes to the base of the nail, and can find the deep path of hot water until the root; and let the patient feel a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be rooted from all its roots. In this way do one after another, until you have removed all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds with salt as much as they are healthy.
And cure the shaking.
Here is the translation of the text:
For the pus-filled blisters
For the pus-filled blisters that appear on the body, which come from corrupt substances, it is necessary to make a cauterization on each bump: a thin cauterization made with mugwort, which is held in the fire, or with the root of aristo, or with the lenticular cauterization. And it is not necessary to do this at the very beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further, but are broken up and healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
For when an artery is cut Maitres doctors, I pray you to hear my words and to pay attention to the advice that I am about to give on this most important of topics. For there are many times when a great deal of trouble can come from the blood in the arteries, which comes out onto the skin when cutting into an abscess or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell.
Many times there is great trouble from the blood in the arteries, which comes out onto the skin when cutting into an abscess or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell. And you must do this: when one of these happens, immediately put your index finger on the vein, and strain it until the blood stops flowing from the wound with your other hand, and do not allow any drops of blood to fall; then take some olive oil, small or large as the wound requires, and heat it thoroughly until it is completely red; then dip  .i., that is, a cotton swab, a piece of wool, or a piece of cloth into the hot oil, and hold it over the vein at which you are holding your finger, or where you are holding your finger, and keep the oil in place until the blood has stopped.
And if it bleeds when you lift your finger from the vein, and the oil has cooled, then quickly take another swab, or a piece of wool or cloth, dipped in hot oil, and hold it over the place where you lifted your finger until the bleeding stops.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood has stopped; and be aware that you should not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other harm should come to the patient; and know that when the artery has been cut, it cannot be well healed unless one of the four ways that we have said is used: or by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying it, or by putting medicines on it which have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and held tightly.
Who will administer a hot poultice closely wrapped around the wound or place burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he does so to no avail?
Who will administer a hot poultice closely wrapped around the wound or place burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he does so to no avail? If there is no medicine or remedy present, one must place his index finger upon the edge of the wound as we have said, and hold it firmly over the wound and the edge; and do not move it, but wet it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thick and solid; and make incisions in front of the area where cauterization and medicine are needed.
Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds. We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the methods, causes, tools, and shapes of cauterizations are needed; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on from there in this chapter by that same path for those who wish to heal more lightly than those who desire it.
And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, oh man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterices, and for this reason it is necessary to be more cautious.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolish actions. For such things often come from people who, because of the severity of their illness and the greatness of their wickedness, die easily due to the mischief that their disease brings about, and because of the great evil in their illness; and for this reason one should be afraid. And of those who have such a way of thinking, who say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not good that you consent to such people who come to you who have this manner; but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open your doors foolishly but carefully confirm what you are certain of, and what you may have taken from him; and use prophecy and indication when treating your sick, so that health may be converted; and he who will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Here is the translation:
Here is the final sentence for you to translate. Please provide your own translation if you would like me to compare it to mine or if you would like to see it in another format:
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to delay the work of this chapter in the treatment.
And I saw one child where the head was swollen with water, and each day it swelled more until he could not support his own weight; and because of the moisture it came to be as if dead, and this moisture, so gathered around the bone under the skin, between the skull and the bone; and the work of this chapter, so is this moisture gathered around the bone under the skin, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a wide slit in the head at the top; and be also as far apart as possible, so that the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spetumile:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see are the folds of the skin on either side, and when you press it with your hand from the inside, there is no response; then cut three slits in the form of this way:
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After drawing out the bandages and powders, pour wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then unbind it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be drawn out evenly, and give the patient dry meat soaked in a little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the aposteme, and the joining of the astringent; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
So size it accordingly, and fill it according to your ability, and beware that you do not plug the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die of thirst and due to the evacuation of moisture.
of remedy
When a person has a disease called "cataract" in the eye or in the knee, and the disease is old, and medicine does not benefit him, then the next treatment is to cauterize with that which covers the .ij. arteries.
When the person's eyes are covered with a film, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help him, then, when you peel back the skin, the patient should rub his head with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then extract the patient's tongue to all 1/4th of a cloth; then look where the vein goes, and their necks are both on the sides of their ears, and they have been torn; then sign the necks with one and the other of two spatulums that are sharp at both ends, as far as the bone comes out, and this one is done by the large side of the head.
And if you see it, you should remove the blood vessel with the spatulum and cover it on top, cutting it like two sides with two spatulas at the same time.
And when the vein is covered, let it continue to flow upward without stopping.
Et si le sang ne sort pas au toucher, il convient que tu mesures la quantité de l'espace de .iij. doses, puis signe d'encore et fente jusques à l'os; et celui que il convient de mettre de sang est vj c/, et par aventure un peu plus ou moins. selon ce que le malade peut souffrir, et la repletion de l'artere; puis regarde la plaie: s'il reste sur l'os point d'écoulement, si le cope que apostèmes chaus n'i veigne, puis estrange la plaie et lie, et la cure d'oignement tant qu'elle soit guérie.
And if the blood does not flow upon touching, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of 3 doses, then sign to stop and cut as far as the bone; and that which is to be put of blood is vj c/, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no drainage, if the plug that absces chaus does not come out, then extrude the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment as long as he is healed.
When the ancient migraine comes, and catarrh acquired, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old feverish and similar things, and it is medicated by the methods of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we extrude the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, if as we have told.
And the way to extract them is that the patient should grow his hair on his temples again, and feel the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is not much filled except in some people who are too cold; and if it is filled, then remove its neck with some drapes, then rub its place with any rough cloth, and raise the place of hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula where there is this form:
And then peel the skin slightly until you feel the artery, and then turn it up like pincers, and completely remove the webs that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it into a point with the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of .ij. degrees. Because if it is not cut, then there will be no saving of anything at all.
And turn the blood of 1/4th to 1/3rd, and if the artery is large, then tie it with a double strong silk thread, that it not be broken before the wound's healing; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 threads at that moment as well, and then, if you see, then cauterize with fire from the cautery knife until the bone is reached, and this is the work of the surgery, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
For fire cautery is an aid to finish off the moisture: for this is a greater aid against moisture. Ou il convient por l'extraction des arteres que om remplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se sans court de l'artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l'estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n'as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d'aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il convient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l'extraction de l'artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cet cautere trenchant de  .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor. For when the instrument is too soft, it holds less heat. And should have between the .ij. tools a .i. inch of space, and then when you have cut into the .ij. veins, and you measure with the sharp edge on top until it reaches the bone, and cap the voice in .ij. veins; and they are separated between the .ij. shoulders because it is not softened by this cautery from all sides; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes run down into the veins that are under the skin of the head of force, and the medicine I make does not benefit him, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feels a cold movement as if it were frost; and since they are kept and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall, and the papers get burned and scalded by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they called it the "old cure", and that is what you do to the sick person whose hair is at the front, then make .iij. cuts at the front equally long; and one of the cuts be as much as .ij. two all along the front up to the nose, and the other .ij. two at the sides over the papers, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. mandibles, and each wound have the quantity of .iij. dos;
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady..." "And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady and keep them still until you reach the middle cut; and if they prick again, hold them steady again until you reach the other side; then remove the sharp edge and express the blood; then put a piece of fine cotton cloth in each cut, and cover it with wet linen dipped in wine and oil and mustard, and make sure that the feet don't come into contact with it; and on the third day unbind him, and apply a great amount of cold water, then apply the basilicon ointment with oil of roses, and other cures for wounds, until he is healed."
"And then remove the sharp edge..."
When there is no catarrh coming by custom, and you see the hairs drawn back and small, and the vision weakens, and the paper burns; and the hair is scattered, and where it chief hurts a pain, and the patient coughs; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is for them, if it is this, so it is.
And so you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a wide cut across the forehead, and another large incision from side to side; and start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and cut all the way down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he drinks; and when the bone is exposed, then wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then tie cotton wool and linen thereon; then lay wet cloths in wine and oil, and beware of an abscess; when it is exposed, so you must rub the bone until the char begins to be born, then cure it with dry things, which cause chaps.
In this manner: take .iiij. parts of flour of rice, and .iii. parts of kollofyn, and make a plaster therewith; and apply it to these wounds in order to produce chaps everywhere.
of the stiffening of the ears
All who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone, or similar thing as iron; or seed, as peas and beans; or flowing thing like water and easily moving and similar things.
For when it chills in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not fit into the ear, nor does it grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then pour a drop of violet oil or seed oil; then it is extracted, and the work is to shake it, and the nose stops when the shaking comes, and puts cloth or wool pieces behind the ear; and raises the ear up. Many times this cure comes; and if it does not come, it is extracted with gentle pincers, from which there is this form:
If it jumps out with the pincers, it is good; if not, then extract it with a small double hook; and if it does not jump out with that, make a chain of raindrops and put the end of the chain or a small passageway in the ear very hard, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the chain; then try to force it, because many times it comes like this as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, take glans from it, and put cotton in some tool which is right for what you want to do, and put a drop of cotton; then press the glans on the stone or whatever it is, and try to force it. If it does not jump out with any of these things that we have said, then cut the ear so that the aposteme is split, and spasms; and the way to cut it is that you first extract the disease from the head of the skull, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then put the sick person between your hands and turn their ear up, and make a small cut at the root of the ear with grease or something hanging; and let the cut be as the moon, until you touch the stone, then press it according to your strength, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until they are well. And if it is grain that has become damp and begins to swell, extract it; and if it cannot be extracted, make a thin paste of it according to this form:
And make an incision in the grain but do not make it when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them carefully and finely with a blade and add to the syrup, as we said, so that the extractions are ordered.
So that the patient uses sneezing with condiments first and wipes the ear with old cotton. And be careful on which ear he has fluid. If it is, it's good. If not, take many little stones according to the length of your finger and make them hot on the fire; and put one or two of them in his ear, and pull them out from the other side, and take another stone from the ear that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with a stone in an ear until all the fluid has come out, and so it comes out completely; and if you see, take a piece of straw, and bottle one of the ears, and the other ear take fire from the straw, as we said in the stone.
In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, such as a flea or similar thing, cure it as we said in the division; but if it is a large one that can be felt, make an incision with a blade; and this is the lightest thing to extract from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no worms, take the pinches softly, and if they do not appear, take the hair of where it is the form.
And be tight below and wide above. And pour the subtlest chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck all the way; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, if you break in with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have said, administer distillations which the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where we treat the distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, where it is the form as you see:
And be tight below and wide above. And make a small hole for distillation with an instrument of silver or gold, and press it above to distil; and to squeeze the distillation into an instrument of silver very well made for sucking, and if you see that you have taken a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines in the hair, and let the hair be in the ear; then pour the oil into the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly so that the oil is distilled from the ear; and have the patient smell it, and let the distillation burn slightly at the fire as we do when we distil in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the sticking up of the ears
No child is born without a piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to an upward movement of the ear, or a horse's hoove inside it, and such a piercing often comes all the way into the ear if one cannot see it; and there is no piercing of the ear,
then let the ear of the patient face the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation become apparent, then that is all this spice has done to it:
and cut it open before and behind all the plain, so that it doesn't break the ear; if the piercing is a horse's hoove or a corset of the ear, then hold it with subtle pinches and gently bend it until the hoove is all boneless.
And if the inflammation is completely in the ear, then take a fine, light razor and warm it slightly, then place it at the base of the ear. If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels as a grating sound when he hears, pierce lightly and be careful not to hurt the ear nerves; then put into the ear a tent according to its width from the hole, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Make no incision until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle it with vitriolic broach; and if you see the ear escape, cover it so that you take out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin made of rosewater and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if the pain of inflammation comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that treat the pain of inflammation which are or prepare distillations.
of the paper
Here is the translation of the text:
"And if not, then with the fire of the small lenticular cautery, and the cautery after the incision is made; and many times they return, as nothing remains at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back."
"of the grief"
"Many times come in papers one thing that seems like green in its form and in its dureness, and because of this disease is called "hay fever", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and below; The ovraiges are these: take care if the hay fever is silent of one part and of another, and it is a light thing to know; make the cut wide, then the scorch of each part lightly, then take it to the pincers, and the cope. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, so do not harm the patient; and if the split is great, if the assembly has a seam, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any effort, for the oilmen restore it soon enough and cause pain."
And if the piercing comes down to the inside of the ear towards the top part, then turn the paper over, and keep the piercing in one place with a hook on both sides; and if the paper is cut by the incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the piercing is done, pour on oil of salt water, and treat the hole of that person who has caused it as long as the patient remains sick.
of the fat from the hairs
is made from the fat of the hairs that are spun into paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears come to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep, and their papers get wet above them from the exirnach that opens into oil. And when you press the place between your fingers, you can feel the exirnach coming out.
Is made from the fat of the hairs that are spun into paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears come to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep, and their papers get wet above them from the exirnach that opens into oil. And when you press the place between your fingers, you can feel the exirnach coming out.
Take then all a piece of linen between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and keep so that you do not stir in the split, lest you come to the whole spittle up to the oil, lest you stain it.
And if the dislocation does not come out in the effort of the split, so take it up lightly with the split so that it comes out; then remove it as we have said, then soak the cloth in water and put it back on the joint, and extract from the splint.
And if there are such men who grind silk and put on it that moisture which is delayed. Then the cure until it is healthy. And if it comes to the base of an abscess, so the cure with ointments softening until it is healthy.
of the hairs of the papers
When hair grows in paper form contrary to nature, and becomes dry, if it damages the hairs, and brings about kinds of diseases like tears accustomed and softening of papers and albugine, as much as it is a cause of destruction of hairs; and the cure is according to 2.ij. ways: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine water according to what it is before, or by chapister of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person in your hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; but if not, pour an needle on all 1. thread of above; and let this be taken from the margin of the paper or the hairs growing therefrom, and thread 1. thread above all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut in the part of the paper, cutting the hairs, taking all the great tear to the small one; then take out the thread, and put the paper a little piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper an outline of the face, as the shape of the mirthe, and it is necessary that the outline be according to the quantity that you see lift the paper which is devised for all.
And if there is a need that which has work do great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then cut on all 2. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear up to the small one; and let him be at the gap near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil in one of the 2. angles of the cure, then scorch it completely; then assemble the 2. lips to a stitching of a needle on all 1. thread of fine wool, and wash the blood, and make air the surplus of the threads over the 2. sorcelings on anything sticky, if you see do this; and if not, leave the stitching and the threads up to 3 days or 4; then cure the wound without stitching with drying and binding things, because the paper revives at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitching is moist (if the ancient say), and it is workings without fear;
and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure who is also like the skin of myrtle, as we have told, a .iij. oncines according to the form which is here:
then take this one that comes up at small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take an needle where there is 1 thread, and bottle up the figure; and bottle up another thread less than the first, and join them together evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 lips of the wound with a stitch, and the incision with ointment and similar soothing bloodletting;
and there is no time that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"If it delays, if the cope hardens, then cure it as long as it is sound; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the 2.ij. dogs that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:"
"The ovations shall be such that you squeeze out a very fine needle, and bottle 1. (a certain number) of threads of silk that is very fine; then assemble the ends and tie them finely together, and make the length of the threads one palm's length; then order in the chase 1. (another number) of very fine silk threads quickly, and tie them to the chief with a thread; then put the disease on your chief; and be delicate with the sun so that the ovations are subtle; for it is a subtle and small ovation, then bottle the needle in all the chase next to the hair root, and make it pierce through the paper quickly while you draw it up; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and bottle that hair in the chase, if there is 1., or 2., or 3. or more; then pull your hand out so that the hair comes out completely from all the chase with the natural hair.
And if it is chased, treat and let the hairs grow out with it, pull the chase at all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out from behind and you see it through the sight of oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and pour the oil and leave it there .ij. or .iij., until the hair hardens in its place and a chara is born there; and if the hairs are small, so accompany .i. long hairs of nature, and raise with that one that you leave, as long as they are stretched and then let them down.
of oil
When this illness, called "aleacrati" or the porrittion comes in oil, there are two ways: one is natural and the other is un-natural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a caustic, and similar things.
And the method of treating this in the text is that you split that wound, and separate the lips from it, and put linen thread inside, and let it heal until it is healed; and you should not use anything in the cure of it that dries and constricts. For if you do that, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, like fenugreek; and the water or oil of rose and flax seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted into any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it with that.
And the treasures of your cure, if you put yourself on guard so that it does not become harder according to the form that it was before; and the work that we have said above is effective only after having treated this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
from the wood that comes in the oil
This disease, which is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental comes from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige in it that you squeeze a needle, in which there is .i. double thread, and insert it into the wood, and let it pierce all the way to the left larmier so that the thread comes out at 1/4th of the way from the other side, then take the wood above the needle, and a large spatumile.
And if the figure of the paper comes according to this that it is good, then it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 1/4th cut or cost on the paper; and let the chaps of the 1/4th cuts be on the 1/4th angles of the incision that you have coped, and let the figure be as if it is the figure of a letter which has non "griesche"; then take this wood, according to the quantity that its cost is cut, from that which follows the paper, then join the 1/4th parts that are cut, and tie them with a thread of wool; then treat with the medicines that we have said above, and with tents, until he is well.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, you should make a plain cut between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is written above; then stretch between the 19 ribs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master surgeons prepare the apparatus appropriately so that they can restore the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs to be treated and to operate with many instruments.
in order to cut the paper
When this paper-cutting has been done in such a way that the paper above is glued with oil, and cannot be moved or performed in its natural way, then it is necessary that you insert the point of an razor between the paper and the oil, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you have reached what is in contact with the thin spatumil, which should not be too sharp or too thick, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp a spatumil that bleeds the oil; and make your incision, from which you will peel off the glued one, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and is cured of all of it, and never uses salt water, and soft water, and vinegar; and after three days use colier and cutting things as much as he is cured.
of the oil
Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems like a long-lasting hard syphyl, and another which is not nervous, but seems like a white congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and takes care of it in order to make it pinhole-like, it cannot be done; and both of these appearances begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they blind all the sight and all the light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is so that the patient puts his hand in water, then he opens the nails; and take the paper in your hand, then twist the nail into pinhole-like nails, and raise it up; then take an awl, and put there 1.j. hair of horse, or of mare, or of bull, and a strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail with the whole awl, and tie the nail to a thread and raise it up, and peel off at the root of the nail that which remains after the cut is made in the usual way, and never twist the nail unless you have said so; then peel off everything that is left of the split skin, until there is only the natural skin left or the tear, so that by incision does not come to the end of the tear; and any time the nail is twisted at the edge, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off everything that is left of the split skin, until this is the form:
And keep so that the split skin does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil into the wound, and of colchicum made of litargite, and leave it until the next day; then cure him of what he needs until he is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncious cannot enter, this image of the nail from medicines is cured many times; and it is born as I have told you in the division, and if you see him covered, so do the oil work of the sick person, and take the spatumile light poc according to this form:
And lift up the nail slightly, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the root is pressing, then distill from your mouth in oil made of white lead and red lead and a little bit of wine, and stop the oil until the next day; then start again with the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all bone.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as it has been told for the aposteme chaus, then the milk, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then start again with the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the meat of the eye hurts in the oil by great harm, then suspend it in the oncine, and pour a part into it, not all at once, so that tears do not come; then distill in the red oil coliere which is made of white lead.
of the horse that was born with a twinge on the eye
Of the horse that was born with a twinge on the eye
and when the incision is completed and all the hair is cut, then pour on the oil of seaweeds or you have distilled red oil and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put cotton cloth on top with an abomination of ointment, so that it is assuredly warm; and if it does not stay put, and the horse stands up, and you doubt about warm ointment, then leave the oil and cure the sore by soothing ointments; then return to your work until he is well, and in this way make the hair grow by using this appearance.
But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil to the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from that work.
of the hairs
the hairs
and let them grow a little by degrees according to this form:
and carefully clean the oil with a soft cloth, and do not touch the tips of the spatulums, and perform this operation at noon before the sun, and be very careful so that you only touch the voines; and when you have done this, if it is a green or red wine, distil it into the oil to corrupt what is delayed from the sebel.
And if you do not have the power to hold back all of this in that hour, then make a paste on oil of things that alleviate the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days as long as the pain is alleviated and is assured by the pustule being warm, then begin again according to this method which is before as long as it is healthy; and that is the shape of the powers:
of the fistula of the oil
The mirrour thus named "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then cut it open on the pustule, laying bare all the moisture within, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then this is the shape of the "aspre chief", and let it be made from a hard wood like an axe head, and let it be sharpened as a chisel, as it is in the present form:
And place on the bone's place of corruption, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little while as you know that corruption has been removed; and do not repeat it, then restore the place of drying medicines.
If the bone is tight and the heart is not broken, and the base of the bow is tight and remains so for six days, and it does not come out again and there is no abscess, and bad accidents do not happen, knowing that he is well; if not, then according to this form, you should bring back the fistula to the perforation of the nose: and this is that you uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and by medicines that dry out, and when it is uncovered take care that .i. [the iron] be in four angles, and that the string be thin up to the top so as you see it here:
Then place on the bone with care the iron, and remove your hand from the oil .i. little, then turn it all completely until it pierces the bone and feels painful to the patient through this that the wound comes out in his nose if he keeps his hand on his nose; and then restore the place of drying medicines, as I have taught you, and when the heart is broken and hardens the bones, so goes the matter into the nose; and it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the issue of the oil
When the hairs are open all over the body, and there is no disturbance to the spirit, nor any decrease in it, if you bind the sick person, then make him well, then put a compress on him made of wool, or sheepskin, or linen, or hemp, and then place oil on it. i.e., an infusion made of oak-acorn, aloe, incense, and sarcolle, and then strain the oil, and smear it on strips of cloth and bandages; and the way to do with the strips of cloth is that you squeeze the strips of cloth enough so that they are soft, and double each one three times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hairs need; then strain them from above a hard bandage, and start again with the compresses not to hurt; then take off the compresses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if it becomes thick, you should strain it more; then take off the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see that the oil has improved, it is good; if not, then start again with the infusion, and the strips of cloth, and the bandage, and the compresses until he is well.
When the silk thread that is used to weave the fabric is broken,
When disruptions come in the woven fabric, then open, and comes out like paper so as to see; therefore if you cover it, the work is such that you fix a needle at the root of the thread from one side to the other, and then another needle or there is a double thread from the part of the arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then tie one end of the double thread and fasten one part of the weave, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put oil of rose on it; and let it sit as long as the thread twists with the weave, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never does the wound get restricted by the weaving of a circle of cloth from any part as long as it is healed.
And if the hairs have grown long and even, pierce them with a fine needle which comes out perfectly from the oil, and draw out the moisture of the albuginous pus and clean the hairs, and remove it quickly; then extract it until it is healthy.
with a fine needle
with a fine needle
hot oil
Here is the first line of the text:
"After a short rest, and when the needle rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place, remove almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little of the valuable essence into the oil or water wet with oil extract and oil. Then with the healthy oil, bind the wound. We, and those who are with us, put on common brooches with plenty of extract."
"If almagda cannot enter the oil because it is too hard, for there are some people with very thick hair, then you must press the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:"
And so in fact separate the conjunctive altogether, and don't be too thorough with it, but make it soft, then pour in the blood, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient .i. the sleeper coming, because he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and press light meats, and don't move his head either to the right or left, and tie him up according to his disposition until three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put on the bond until seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or afterwards, but it is necessary that you tie up this one, because it is necessary that the blood rises quickly.
So in fact separate the abscess, that you untie before the seventh day, and prepare it for this one who soothes an abscess; and when it is calmed down, then untie the vision and put on his face  .i. an eyelet to cover for a day, and stay in that same dark house. And then take him out of the house little by little, and turn him around; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
And some came to us from the Land of Yraq who told us that in our country they sometimes drink blood, from which one sucks water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in my life, and I have never read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of the Almagest, so that he who does not know them may see them; and they are properly made of air.
And let the chief of these middles be of this subtile thing, and the behind in 3.iij. angles acute.
of the chare soro th th nays
No times are born or neis chars ajostees diverse, of coi there is none who seem scorpions on the mouth; and if there is any such or it has a char enchaned of fox color, and if there is a char soft of good color. In that case of these chars which is soft, and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make sit the patient between your hands under the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour on these chars the subtle subtile agut from one side, until you know that this char is all osseous.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostées toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisile et aigue ou vin.
And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if the opening is very small of the instrument that moves lightly, so that nothing remains; and without lifting you up, or an abscess at the root, so that it is secure as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them as soon as the swelling subsides and all the pus is drained, then pour or spray quickly and readily or wine.
And it should be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a chain, and you should also hold it so that you can see it when the oil or any liquid is heated;
of the shoulder over the neck
Many times a disease rises at the shoulder neck that is called "telul", and grows and becomes great enough so that it is seen in sight; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, and all the bone then, and put fire cautery or burning medicine on it; and if you delay to cover it until it is great, so take care if it is hard, of color change, poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when you cover it once, a great evil comes to the patient; and the abscess is touched gently, not with iron of color change, and you see that he can be covered all, so empty the patient and cover it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
When the neck has been cut and cured
When solutions of continued use come in one of these ovraid cartilage, i profite poc, fuer than in some men. It is therefore important that when a man has a sore throat, he looks at it carefully; and then apply the 2 lips to a stitch, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, you must scorch all parts of their cheeks as they heal, then assemble the 2 lips to a stitch, bind them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder and incense broied; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of fort or other plaster that sticks, and leave it till it falls off, then cure it with ointment as long as it is healthy.
The manner of the stitch is that you join the patch: or with needles, as we have said in the stitch from the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the lips
the lips
of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restaignans et desiccatives; et se celle char retourne aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne retourne mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
Here is the translation of the text:
"No time is wasted in trimming the hair at the top of the head, inside the mouth, between the cheeks, the hair that is ugly and sharp; and no time is lost in letting the hair turn black and yellow, and be rancid, until the disease appears at the root of the tooth; if it is necessary to hold it with your fingers, and keep it between your hands, and pluck out the teeth or the hair that appear; so that there is no delay: and in this way, you make the black and green, and the yellow and other colors, until they are completely removed; and if one tooth needs to be pulled out at first, it is good; if not, then start again the next day and keep plucking them out, until they are all gone; and know that teeth have different shapes of instruments to pluck out, according to what the work requires, for the razor that plucks out the hair between the cheeks has a different shape from that which plucks out the teeth."
It is necessary that you extract the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for this should not be delayed; because it is a substance so moist until there is no excuse to remove it. And so when the patient is forced to extract, it should be certain that the tooth is loose. Often the pain of the disease disappears and he thinks that the tooth is sound, and has it extracted; but nevertheless the pain does not go away until then, for we have already tried this with these saints; and when you are certain about the loose tooth, so it should be scraped very well with a sharp scraper around the tooth; then pull it out with your two fingers or small pliers at each push and push until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers well; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him tight so that he does not move.
After the tooth has been extracted properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take any of these instruments and push it in from each side slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the root is broken and bleeding, then fill it with rags, lay or put them where they are; and if it is extracted delicately with small pliers so that it does not break when extracted, and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
And you do well to take care not to break it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than the first. And you should take care not to do so as does that ignorant saint, who, through his haste and impetuousness, often breaks the tooth completely, and does not administer any of those which we have described; but brings one often by the noise of that great disease because of the roots that it delays, or because of the tooth that it breaks, as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth has been extracted, if you wash the place with wine or mint and vinegar, and they run away from there, often coming, if you employ the place of vitriolic; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, so that the thick ones do not double up when you pull out the teeth; and these are the forms:
And be of strong limbs so that they do not bend on pulling, and be of good forged iron, and be toothed for holding the teeth in place.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains dry at pulling, if you put cotton wet with oil or butter on the place, until the roots are soft, then pull the teeth which are called 'algefri', from which the jaw seems a saw; and be made inside like a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the whole of the tool around the root, and put the instrument which is called "Althali", that is to say palainche, of which this is the form:
And be careful and strong so that it does not break, and the root comes out through this, which is good; if not, help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come after:
And if one helps oneself with this tool which has .ij. rain, of which this is the form:
and other iron tools that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems a great pliers, whose form is:
And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the master physicians subtlely try themselves by their own instrument, according to what his work and the disease show him, for there is a variety of diseases where the old did not teach an instrument for this; and if it does not break the carriage or other bones on which it rests, if it seeks the instruments that are right, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form: And be strong and well holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then return it to the right place of suitable medicine for him, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so the re-implantation of all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it comes out after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot sew or file it: then the raze; and if it is sharp with the tooth, take this instrument which I show you here, which resembles a small pick, and of iron made, inside:
And the cap put on and on hand for the hardness of the tooth, and for what you can move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, so take a file of this size:
and is also like the lime where one makes needles; and in a lime poke and poke with your hands gently day after day so that it does not move until it breaks; then the smooth at the end to all razor, and its base is too rough and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to file the sharp edge until it is even, so it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth loses its grip
When the tooth loses its grip, either by percussion or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he chews, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and that does not work; if you restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and pales, but gold wire never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any loose teeth, then take the thread and double it between the 10 sound teeth, then put the threads between the loose teeth, if there are more than 10, until you have tightly covered all the teeth on one side; then gently and carefully tighten your grasp, until it no longer moves; and if it comes loose, or if the thread breaks, then restrain it with another wire. If it stays put and serves its purpose for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the 10 sound teeth and the 10 loose ones, as you see:
and if the tooth comes loose, then put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not mix in who are not skilled and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of whale bone, and put it back in its place where it has come loose, and tighten it up as we have said, and let it stay and serve for a long time.
to copper the link of the tongue
To copper the link of the tongue: De coper lou liien de la lengue.
and if you see it turn black or green or hard, then don't let the patient feel it or touch it, because that is a wart; and if it declines towards blotchiness, and there is moisture, then pour the onyx, and make a fine fent with a spatumil, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if he doesn't go away to your ovraige, then put vitriole broiet onto it as long as it is stained, and then come back to your ovraige as much as you carry it; then lift up the leu of aysel and seile, and cure him with other cures until he is well.
the abscesses of the throat
No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, which is to say, a small-sized abscess; and she had almost completely closed up her whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for another day or two. The abscesses were raised up so high that they had almost completely blocked the throat. I then hurried, and inserted one of my fingers into her throat, and pushed it further in, and there was a great deal of pus; afterwards I removed my finger from the abscess, and poured some of it out, and there was only a little bit of blood left; and thus the passage in her throat was unblocked for this woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and those abscesses healed back together, and filled up the space that I had emptied out, so that they were almost completely blocked again; then I cauterized them inside her throat: thus her condition did not improve; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God's will about them after me.
of the wine
de l'eau
And let the chief take a braid of hair whereon to put the medicine, as the braids of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine over the uvula; and let the patient lie down on his side so that saliva and spittle run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and wound; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, until you see him calm and the taste of the medicine is lessened; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument full of cotton into the chin above, until the cotton hardens on the uvula; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and clean after  .iiij. days or .v.
This treatment is safer than incising, only the cauterization; if it is treated with smoking in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and averronne and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them into  .i. pot, and pour water on them so, and let the pot be very tight with strong clay, and immerse the instrument in the pot according to this way: And let it be of silver or gold, and let one of the shoulders be boiled in the pot with water until the steam rises to the uvula through the chin, as much as the uvula is numb; then apply this often, so that the uvula dries out, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the advent of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a chin and put a hook of hair into it, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the hook of hair does not make the steam heavy in the mouth, and this is good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s'aert à la gorge os ou épine de poisson, ou aucune chose ; si convient donc que tu traies ce que tu peux voir, et li presse la langue au soleil à tout l'instrument, si que tu vois mues la chose ; et ceu que ne t'apert mie et est réponus en la gorge, convient que tu faisses vomir le malade ainsi que la viande soit cuite en l'estomac ; par aventure si istre li chose aerse par le vomissement ; ou li malade engloutisse une pièce d'éponge, ou une pièce de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morцел de pain sec ; et lie à l'éponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse ; et quant elle viendra au leu, si s'aérera, et puis trairas furieusement ; et s'elle ne vient furieusement de ce que nos avons dit, si prends .i. instrument de plonc selon ceste forme :
Mouthwashes of salt water or wine are often effective for removing fish bones or other objects from the throat. Therefore, take this instrument and bend it at the tip so that it can more easily enter the mouth, and lift the top lip; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, which would prevent all flow, nor should you press inwards with force; and test whether the patient swallows the instrument, as it will indicate whether anything is stuck or not; if he swallows it, pour water down his throat, or make him spit it out, or both. And if he spits it out, hold the instrument against his throat at an angle so that he can't swallow it again, and then make him spit it out forcibly. And if he doesn't spit it out as described above, take this same instrument and wipe clean his nose with it; and then make him spit it out; for often objects become stuck in the nostrils.
Mouthwashes of salt water or wine are often effective for removing fish bones or other objects from the throat. Therefore, take this instrument and bend it at the tip so that it can more easily enter the mouth, and lift the top lip; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, which would prevent all flow, nor should you press inwards with force; and test whether the patient swallows the instrument, as it will indicate whether anything is stuck or not; if he swallows it, pour water down his throat, or make him spit it out, or both. And if he spits it out, hold the instrument against his throat at an angle so that he can' t swallow it again, and then make him spit it out forcibly. And if he doesn't spit it out as described above, take this same instrument and wipe clean his nose with it; and then make him spit it out; for often objects become stuck in the nostrils.
No medicine is better than bloodletting, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the mouth of the sick person towards the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I have told you. And if you see the blood, take a little pin, or small scissors, which are worth for him. And if he is not worth, take a dog's tooth, and put it in the mouth of the sick, then pour out or suck up the blood with the tooth; and do this often. And if the sick person is very pale all day, then take full a pitcher of cold water, and open the mouth, and let him drink, and move his hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the cold, spit it.
And if it does not spit as we have said, then sublimate the sick person with ashwood, at the instrument which I have told you in the fumes of the oven; do this many times, for she will not tarry. And the way of the fumes is that you squeeze a pot in which there are charcoal vis, and put the cover on it so that it covers the middle, and in the hole is the head of the instrument; then pour out your fumes, and let the sick person put the tip of the tube in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the fumes do not go out, but come to the blood; and the blood will come now, and if it does not spit, then begin again the fumes many times; and suffer the sick person to be thirsty, and drink salty and bitter things, and not water; and then let him ease his duty which he has done by this government.
And the form of the instrument has regard to how the blood is drawn out, if one can see it, seems like scissors bent for going into the throat; and has a similarity to the beak of a plier, and has sharpness of lime, so that whatever he takes, he cannot leave; and see this form:
the chapisters of the abscesses
The chapisters of the abscesses are, according to what this reminder comes from a and b in this book, and are divided into perforation and incision; and it is in 2 manners which one is in his semblance middle, and of that which it holds moisture. And the second manner if it is because of the leus where they are at the body. Because the abscess of the head is other than that of the fundament, and the abscess of the charnuted leu is others that that comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if for the abscesses it is not necessary to pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if for such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crut, and do not die according to their completion, as well as the abscess which comes from delicate joints. Because when the abscess comes from delicate joints, and we leave it until it is rotten within, by chance if the bond and the nerve of the joint are corrumput, therefore this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is from the principal limb, and you delay the perforation so long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is from the fundament, if you pierce him thus that he dies without digestion complete, so that the one who is from the fundament, may not be rotten perfectly, and be alongied within, and come to fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed down, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the debasement and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation where there is more dependent leu of the abscess, and at the place where it opens; and let the perforation be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all the leus equally where there is no pus.
In cases where it is swollen, follow the direction of the affected member. And when abscesses are in their natural state, so that you leave the perforation until it has been completely digested, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you lengthen the course of their venoms, they will be full of filth; and perhaps their lips will harden and their insides will dry out. And if any abscesses are pierced according to the width of the affected member, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small ruptures; and in large abscesses, large ruptures, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to cover them, and bind them; when they have become as soft as cloth, it is necessary to do the same with them as one does with boils: and if there are such that they are cut in two angles, and if there are any that one covers like the skin of a myrtle, as we said for abscesses of the arms; and if there are any that one cuts into a round shape, and other shapes and appears to be covered.
For those who have no hair, if it is a superficial abscess, you should pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and has a hard boil, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all of the boil at once, but only a part, then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out another part; do this again and again in great pain, until the whole boil is drawn out. But be careful, for if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old men with weak limbs, the wound may kill the patient, and you will not know it. Therefore, use this ointment with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound heals, and look that the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a simple laceration, put linen or old cotton over it; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many ruptures, you should pierce each one with a tent so that they touch each other; and if you have covered part of the skin in the abscess with thread, and have tied it tightly, you should fill it with old cotton or linseed oil, and bind it until the third day; then wash it, and apply ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if the patient is bleeding from the wound, you should apply cold water and quickly, and moisten 1. drapel (a cloth) and put it on the bleeding place many times. And if the bleeding persists, you should use government and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a deep abscess, and the skin is nervous, you should cover it with tents and drapes soaked in wine and oil warm; and if it is in the ear, and the skin is tender, you should cover it with drapes soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil that is cold, until the third day, as we have said; then wash the abscess and clean it and cure it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
And this is what it means:
abscesses
Here is the translation:
And this is what it means:
of the scrofula
Of the scrofula Many times have they placed an abscess on the neck, and released the veins, and caused anger, and never come to another part or cors, and are rotten, and are entangled with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just as the knot and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health. Now, when you see one that is of good disposition in the shoulder, and its color seems to be that of the body, and silent from both sides and does not sink, if it comes that you cut it from above, and scorch each part, and the iij. lips of the neck with one hand, if you need them, just as we have said concerning the abscess at the back of the head; and the tree little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and is not too deep, lest you should cut the spine or the shoulder blade, and the hand does not escape, and look too far forward, lest you should cut it too much.
If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stop blood, and draw out the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the sore is healed, if there are no small scrophulas at your index, if you cut them and wash them away. And if it has in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then it does not come that you cut that scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with dried cotton dipped in Egyptian balm, and then dress it.
If you cut the whole scrofula, then it comes that you gather the iij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, and there should be no delay in sewing because of the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary to sew the root of it, and draw it out strongly, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold excess fluid, pierce where it opens; and pierce thus com those before mentioned, hanging up, then add tentes with oignment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well washed, then dress it with oignement in hanging.
de squinance
the ancient ones spoke of the scarification of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the scriptural word from their speech.
For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the fending of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be removed; and no one should do this for anyone, since all the veins and the base of the malady are at those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. amandres. When the disease is in the channel of the base, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the stranglehold which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;
It is then necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a length of 1.5 inches or a small cut across it, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the cut made by the saw, not in the cartilage; and these are appropriate to the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no need for a tool, and the blade is long enough to cut through it.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the leather of the throat to its full length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the larynx; and avoid the cuts in the flesh, if you see nothing there, and then cut the saw, as we have said.
and is proven by the splitting of the larynx's membrane that jumps in the place where it has been broken, and by the absence of voice.
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour has passed where one doubts strangulation, close the lips of the wound from both sides, and the whole cartilage below the skin; then administer medicines that promote healing, until he is well.
Albuças says: “Don't do this before the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the deficiency causes his death.” Therefore, cover the epiglottis so that the patient does not breathe through the wound, and thus be preserved from death; and
and so the elder is instructed to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in 1 or 2 days and so they are instructed to stitch up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady take a knife and put it in her throat, and she ran to the chapel by the pond.
and I was called by the healer, and I found her as well dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had issued from it, and I could see that she had not bled from a vein but rather from her throat, and her veins were running with blood through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and I healed it as well as I could;
and the girl was only red in her cheeks, and she returned to her usual self;
for I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
of the large throat
is called "gorge hernia", and is a great hernia in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
and it has according to two ways: natural, and accidental; where the natural does not have any reason.
And these accidents occur according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess which comes from us by means of arteries. and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire on anything but in that which is small, and tries and searches into all the inside. if you find it like this also that is fat in us, and has no power at all if the head is cut off, so as to be able to treat the whole body, if there is any left. and search well everything, and cure it as it should be done, until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
and now it is fitting that I make the whole difference between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is harsh and fiery, until the boiling has passed, and it is complete; then rest the fire and heat.
With no heat or fever or pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is his own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins also like a jelly, and grows fat.
and are according to their appearances, or greasy, or moist, and all colors are as I said in the division.
When you come to treat the noise, you should first test and question all the instruments called "entromessoire", according to what their form will be or the paste that follows.
And the method of testing an abscess is that you squeeze or more moistly place your hand on the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated to the core, then let go. And let go when it hurts, because if the instrument goes deeper into the abscess, there will be less pain:  Et si tu viens a la cure dou nout, et que tu viens a l’inquisicion des apostemes, il covient que tu esprueves li nout en deux partes;
Then take out the extruder, and take care not to jump.
If the moisture is running fast, that it be colored, if you cut it as I have said of other abscesses;
and if after the extruder there is no moisture, you shall know that it is fat, if you cut it in a crosswise fashion and pick it up with tweezers, and scorch it lightly on each side, and guard the seed or grain where it lies so that you take it whole;
and if you cannot take it whole, take it in pieces so that nothing remains in place.
For if I do not delay, he returns to us many times;
and if it takes a little time, and does not grieve you, then take the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on something soothing to the sore, and treat with other remedies until he is healed;
and if we give him great care, then let us cut the .ij. lips of the wound, and treat what causes it;
and if the wound is opposite or another place, then let us employ the place of vitriole, and leave it there 2 or 3 days, as long as the wound hurts, and return to what was delayed;
Here are the lines of the text translated into English:
"And they are also like the needles with which sorceresses are sewn, and they are of yellow bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are black are more proven to stick into the knuckles of fistula."
"And they are of 3 ways: great, mean, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations."
"The forms of the needles are of many appearances, so that you see here: great, mean, and small; and if there are needles which have 3 quarters of 3 ways also; "
and if they have once two scabs, and are also of three ways; and if they have once one scab, and once a scabbard only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
And if they have once three scabs, and are also of three ways; and if they have once one scab, and once a scabbard only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place. The chief of these things to do are sharp, and of such I have who cut but on one side, whereon we scratch so that the vein or nerve is not копе;
And of these intermissions are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and also
and are of three ways: great, small, and mean, as you see; and
and do not use any but a sharp knife that is well-sharpened, for the same reason as legs, arms, breasts, hands and fingers, and similar parts;
and never use anything else but a sharp knife that is well-sharpened, according to this form, in order to stop bleeding:
and never place it at the opening of a vein or artery, or according to this great form:
and never stretch the nipples of certain men when they become corrupted, as much as they resemble a woman's breasts;
and grow slow and fat, and who are to be cured, if it is necessary according to this form of this line b until: .g. Then peel the fat, and treat the wound with ointment by washing, then stitch together the 19 lips of the wound, and heal as long as it is well;
And let him drink clear water, and soften it with his own saliva as much as it will take, and make 19 holes in it above, by 19 similar cuts; of which one is held to the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the longest line contains the shortest according to this form, from the line b until the line g; and then burn the skin that is between the 17th and 18th lips, and remove the fat, and I will add what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the removal of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton wadding with a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it has drained the remaining blood and fat, and then clean it thoroughly until it is healthy.
the abscesses of the elbows
The scrofulous lumps that come out of the sores are hard or have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
These that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b until line g.: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, if you employ a piece of old cotton cloth and leave it there for another day, then take out all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating scrofula wounds, and if there is an abscess inside, then apply fire cautery as we have described.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is broken and the skin above it is tight, so often comes the abscess and also it goes to the escaped vein and abscess;
and if one knows how it is for the artery, then is the abscess long enough to be completely healed; and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and when it is for the vein, if you feel pain suddenly;
and it is madness to cut this anus, and most of all when it is dislocated the hips and at the neck and mouth of others, and it is very big. So then the treatment of iron is to be avoided, and that which is at the top also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells with an artery, pierce through the skin from above.
So then the treatment of iron is to be avoided, and that which is at the top also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells with an artery, pierce through the skin from above. then work on the waist as a single piece, and separate the artery from the tissue very carefully, until it is completely uncovered;
then put an awl through it and draw it out to the other side of the flesh, stretching the artery into a double loop of 12 inches long, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
and then set the joint that is between the .ij. links of an intramuscular injection as long as there is no leak there, and loosen the abscess;
and then apply the cure in the form of a bowstring, as long as the link creaks; and then treat with an ointment that comes from a plant, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, so that you can hold it with your hand at the place where you put the ointment on all the skin, Then pour the alcohol into the vessel that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and it has .i. a double thread so that you pull it from the other side; Then cut the abscess, as I told you, or thread of one of the two ends to the two threads;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then another needle is put on all of .i. thread to the incision of the first needle, and the threads are pulled in .iiij. leu;
Then cut the abscess as much as possible, then cut the superfluity of the incision and leave what is tied;
then wrap it with .i. rags wet in wine and oil, then bring him the cures of tent-fabric and herbs until he is well.
of the nerves
Also, when they come from the artery and the vein, they come to the nerves when they are bruised, or due to excessive work, and similar things.
And this often happens with the shoulders and arms and in all joints, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many conditions without pain;
and when they are restrained, if the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed, but wait for the cure;
and mute well all around, and does not move forward or backward, nor up nor down, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron: perhaps it will come contract;
and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin to the spatula. If the appendages are small, if it has a nail, and cut it in its root;
and if it is great, if the hangnail has been torn and the skin has peeled off, then break the bone and join the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
big holes hanging down No time at all comes to the belly and nowhere else does it hurt, and it is called "fungus" because of its appearance, and its root is subtle and its stem large; and there are small ones and very big ones.
and I saw.I. a home who had .ij. belly that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and ran with moisture.
I found these two weights, one weighing .xviij. oz., and the other  .vj. Z., and in the work of incising so that you see the patient is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist with a fine root.
if the cut is wide, and may be in your presence the fire cautery. For the barber often causes too great a loss of blood, and he goes away without you, so hurry then to cauterize him;
and if you see the patient becoming pale and fearful because of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of string, bind the arteriole as we have said, and leave it for .ij. days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the string around the arteriole until it has healed over, and probe through it; and if the roots are large, then have them cut off by themselves for the sake of the belly, but you must cut them well on one side;
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep you from covering the tumor which is of bright color and poor feeling and of rancid milk.
For this is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer hereafter.
when the wound is well
as well as the appearance of the wound coming by cauterizing the wound or incision of syphilis, and is on the belly and has some of the bouez, so as it happens in other injuries, or of blood which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windity;
and if it is due to the rupture of the syphous and the outlet of the bile, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the chest, and it is a light thing without pain, and an opening of various outlets. And if it is due to the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed toward its two ends it returns and goes back again, and by chance if it is stretched, and expands much at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is due to blood, then opens by these signs, the large and hard abscess, and is placed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to wind, then it is hot at the tip, and the work of opening is that you look at its appearance; it is due to blood, then it opens by the artery, or vein, or wind. If it is necessary that you leave the wound open. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, when applying the chapter to the abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowels, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to lie down, and be completely still, then sign around the entire abdomen. then have him move his feet together; then go into the place that you have signed with your foot; And then, put half of the ointment on top to all of the large hook.
Then spread half of the ointment over the thread, and dip your index finger in it, and feel the intestine. If you find that he is caught on the thread, and if he comes loose, apply ointment to the outside of the gut.
and if you find the boil, take it by the edge, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery is against him or he bleeds a lot, then return to your work and take 10 needles, and bind them together with 10 threads, and bind the needles around what you have just pierced that you made pierce in the shape of a cross.
then stretch the abscess over the needles, and if you see anything, cut off the needles, and let it rest in its place until it rot, and bury it by itself. or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said.
or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said. and remove the blood where you find moisture, then heal the wound from what it touches, and bond it.
and the ulcer
We have spoken in the division of the appearances of cancer, and how it should be operated on with medicines, and how one should cauterize its wound; and we say that cancer is contracted in the leg or foot, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the old man says that when cancer is in a limb or toe, as a cancer that is in mamelles, and in cuisses, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is in an early stage; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never known anyone to be cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
And the obviations, when it is in a leg or foot where it can be cut off, as we have said, is that you never purge the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaite the bile.i. good ground for doing the obviation; then throw your scabs or cancer, and your hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press hard at your hand or at any object, and if it opposes the incision of the artery or vein, if it cauterizes until the blood is staunched; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
Of hydropisia Of hydropisia We have already said in the division the appearances of hydropisia, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: there is no need to touch iron in these 2. appearances; namely, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a deadly thing; so when you treat this appearance of hydropisia called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or he has another disease than hydropisia, such as stomach trouble and similar things; then do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of very good health, and he has only hydropisia and is neither too young nor too old, then do it thus: Give the patient a good deal of fire on your hands, and the assistant tightly presses the belly at its lowest part with the pis, then take the spatumile with thorns according to this form: And be they cut into 2 parts from the point, and nevertheless do not let it be so deep that it can come up to the intestine when it is put in, and cannot be hurt;
then look to see if the hydropisia is deposited along the intestines: it must be that you cut it from above down on the hand; and if the hydropisia is due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the belly; and if it is due to bilge, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient lie on his back so that the superfluity does not run into the weak part;
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
And the root of the nose is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, let it drop now on the instrument; empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he will faint, or come close to death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pulses mean; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the pulse which stops at the medicine, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this way; then begin again the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and treat with a little quantity of water:
Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above.
of the cessation of ejaculation Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above. Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above.
And the method for opening is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are cut in length, like the width of a feather, so that the tip enters the middle, as it should; and you must not let the blood come out, which comes out many times, and if it comes out, stop the flow of blood with the hand that stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the penis many times come bilious fluid in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly thing; and there are evil and non-evil ones; it is necessary that you squeeze them with one hundredth of a pound of fine salt, and clean them with diafinicon until it heals. If the fluid is malicious, of green color and foul-smelling, it is necessary that you apply fire to it. When you have cut it, and the fluid is in the penis, and there is some inside the skin and some outside, it is necessary that you take out the fluid that is inside first; and when it has hardened, if it is not secure at the base of the penis, it may come out black and corrupted, so it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then cover it with plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the skin of pomegranates and dates, then cure it with other cures until it heals.
Et s'il est enflé par la fièvre, si on lui applique le cautère lunaire selon cette forme : les cautères aident aux .i. dispositions ensemble : c'est-à-dire, au départ de la fièvre et à sa corruption ; et si le prépuce de la verge est corrompu et rétréci, si il convient que tu enfonces ou conduises dans la verge une chaîne de pierre, et qu'il urine le malade entre ; et quand le poil est arraché au bout de la verge qui arrive à ceux qui n'ont jamais été circoncis, ou s'il y a plaie ou abcès, il convient donc que tu l'escorches avec un instrument cheveu, tant que les liens soient désolidarisés, et que le prépuce de la verge soit libéré de tous côtés ;
And if it is swollen by fever, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form: the cauterizations help to the .i. dispositions together: that is to say, at the start of the fever and its corruption; and if the foreskin of the penis is corroded and retracted, if it is convenient that you push or lead into the penis a chain of stone, and let the sick urinate between them; and when the hair is ripped off at the tip of the penis that comes to those who have never been circumcised, or if there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is convenient that you scorch it with a hair instrument, until the ties are dislodged, and the foreskin of the penis is freed from all sides;
of circumcision
Circumcision is not an obstacle to continuing the treatment if it is like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we carry out this operation by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak about circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their laws, and we only have what we acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the wise ones who made circumcision in the foreskin, and with force, and all a novel; and perhaps if one should cover that above and hold that below, it would be difficult.
Or the foreskin covers it again, and the pain is doubled, and there is no assurance of the cleaning that comes from the flesh; and because of the nail, sometimes the knife slips, and ruins the work, and often there is no need of cleaning, and I have wanted it.
From the cleaning that is performed with all the thread of a string, I found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
For when you squeeze your hand, cut it evenly into two pieces; but the thread should be well-twisted around the hide; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he hears, that you are making the thread tie itself tightly around the staff so much, and then let it go in all ways that you can; and then let it rest in your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the staff and blow or breathe, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the staff is attached; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the leather knot with a double thread, then tie it again with another thread; and hold it between the 2 strings, then cut off the ends with the knife in an orderly manner, and turn the chief of the staff upside down.
and then let it rest in your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the staff and blow or breathe, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the staff is attached; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the leather knot with a double thread, then tie it again with another thread; and hold it between the 2 strings, then cut off the ends with the knife in an orderly manner, and turn the chief of the staff upside down. and then let it run a little and a little, for this is the mud; and put powder on top and top of the powder  .i. drapelet is glued with a mousef of baked egg white mixed with rose water, confited with good oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the other day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
The form of force for purification is thus: both shoulders should be soft and cut, and the shoulders also should be long and even.
The error of purification is when the cut runs from the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the edges form an abscess; and the kop [a term for a body part] evenly, and if you cannot hold it in your nail, then hold it with pincers, and then let it go.
And if it goes beyond three days, and that which is in the root of the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the abscess has dried up, and burn it lightly; if the kop [a term for a body part] can be moved, and you protect the part from the root of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure then the powder of things that have a sour wound, which we have mentioned in the treatment of powders, and if it goes up too much, and it hurts, if it does not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Here is the first sentence translated:
Here is the translated text:
Here is the translated text:
Here is the translated text:
And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take .i. a double thread, and tie at the head .i. a little piece of wool or cotton, and bottle up the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and the bottle it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and linseed oil, and set the patient on a chair, and raise the bladder and the penis with moistened oil and olive oil and water.
and then lightly pour the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, and then double the penis above the bladder, then bottle up the syringe before jusc’to the bladder, and let the patient go to the empty thing, and if it is not done according to this order but that he who leads him or she goes there is twisted; then take all the thread out of the little piece of wool and more, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and make the urine run.
and restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relaxed.
For diseases of the bladder:
When scabies or itch comes into the bladder, where it is gathered together, and you see that it distils water and medicine, then do this with all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its shape:
It is closed, and if it has .ii. perforations: .iij. from one side, and .i. from the other, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine can stop well the penis without addition, if it may be drawn out moisture, and put on when necessary.
And when you see that your medicines go into the bladder, put the chief of the cup in the moisture, and draw while carrying it, which will draw the moisture to the cup, and then rebounce it strongly on the carrying one; if it will enter the moisture, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the shape of the subtle cloth in which the bladder is rinsed: if it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;
And it is of silver or brass, and this is the head higher up; and desoz to 1 . i . breast or liiens; then take a bladder of sheep and put in the moisture that you saw clisterize the bladder, then tie between the 1 . i . breasts form of a good double thread, and heat 1 . i . cup this moisture on the fire; then bottle the head with clistere to the penis, and strain your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming forward, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
And from stone
We have said in the division the manner of cutting stones, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone cut to rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must act upon; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is cut in the bladder often comes out with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtleness; and I open it, and I massage the patient's penis, and I rub it many times, and then it hardens; and because of these jumps, the foundations are lost; and the healing of the children is lighter until they are 24 years old, and it is very heavy in the old, and it is painful in those who are between middle age and old age; and the cure is more light for those who have the great stone than for those who have the small one.
And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient with enema, in order to extract all the contents which is in the intestines. For it does not bother him at any time to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and bring him to the fire at a medium heat; so that the stone falls into the bladder from above, and does not come out again; then let him sit between your hands, and his legs between your knees, so that the bladder is all turned towards you; then question it and touch it.
If you feel the stone in space, then hurry now to trim on top of the stone. And if it does not stick to touch all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, then the disease is serious, or your two middle ones; and pour into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it on your two, if the moans in the neck of the bladder; then press your two, and pour at the back where you see cut.
And order the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and order him that he extends to his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand lift the skin that is below the testicles in the part where one cuts; then pour the spermatic cord, from which it takes its form:
And make between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and be right on top of the stone, and your two are attached to the foundation, and the cut from top to bottom so that it is wide at the back, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big:
So that the press if your two that is at the foundation, so that they do not work; and know that there is part of the stone where it is angles, and edges: it is greased to come out; and if it is round in front, similar to a globular shape, and rounded, its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s'elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu'elle n'eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'estrainche de vitriole;
So if there is only one stone, then tap it first at the base of the bladder, and then cut deeper, and then trim it with a sharp tool. And if there are more than one stone, then first tap the largest one at the base of the bladder, and then cut deeper, and then trim it with a sharp tool. For in two things the patient dies: either his urine comes out quickly because the opening cannot be closed, or else he does not urinate at all; but you should nevertheless try to extract it with tweezers, or break it into pieces, as long as you do so little by little.
And when you have finished your work, anoint the wound with balm and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and put thereon a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then untie the bond from the patient's neck, and do not remove it until three days have passed.
And when you have dislocated it, so well raise its oil and water, then cure it with the ointment of the dead and the ointment of basil, until it is healthy.
And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and frost of blood in the bladder, and is held back by this, which comes out in a certain way that without jumping with urine: then you must put it in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and pour it out.
Then raise the wound with water and salt and straw, and aid it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it comes that all the hours that you cure it, that you bind the legs, and put the medicine on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it lies in the tube of the urinary bladder, and is pushed out, and the urine cannot come out; then cure it by this that I have said above, that you cut it many times; I have already tried this.
Take .i. piece of iron according to this form and make it at .iij. angles with .i. twig:
Then take 1/2 a twig and stick it up the tube, so that it does not come out at the bladder end; then press the bit stuck up in the tube a little, until it comes to the stone; then make a hole in the stone with the stick little by little until you can see urine coming out on the other side; then quickly let the urine go and the patient will be better.
If you cannot do this in any other way to stop the patient's pain, then take 1/2 a twig and stick it up the tube, and another one upside down on top of it, and pass the bit stuck up in the tube between the two lines, then pull it out hard, and clean out the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is well.
of the woman's stone
So be it that a woman is pregnant in women, and if there is any, the cure is grief, and is defended by .iij. things: the one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is c’on cannot find a woman well knowing who disdains to show himself to mirth, even when she is married.
And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the child of the woman is more perfect than the child of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is much fear.
And if it is necessary to go out, then command a wise woman, and do not cut her off, and if you do not get her, do not look for 1.1. cast mirth; and the present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her that she make the one that you command in the inquiry of the stone;
and look well if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to put his right hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she trueves, then she binds her right hand, and recommends that she put her right hand or with the pain of the malady, and wants and presses her left hand on the vessel formed.
If she pees, then it is necessary that she move from the bladder's entrance until the pubic bone's root gradually, so that she arrives at the leg's root; then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle where the tool is placed, and feel the stone on that part; and do not move her legs above the stone or behind, and make the incision first small.
Then pour the cut in the waist, if you feel the stone so high that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and with furrows. If you know these appearances, then know the outcome.
And if it comes out, then put vinegar on the wound, and keep it for an hour until the wound is well-healed; then return to your work, as long as the stone has come out, and have tools to help you in this work, which I told you about in the extraction of the stone from men.
and if it comes out, and this is the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and drain it with a cup and a bowl, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, except by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the veins have closed, return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm.
of hernia carnous
of hernia carnous
And the generation of this water is of such a weakness that it comes to the testicles, and is spread out this material.
And there is no time when it comes to striking against the joints, and this moisture comes in many colors: or this color declines to yellow, or this is not red, or black, or aqueous white, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognition of this assembly, because if it is or white so that we have said, then the abscesses are red, i.e., short, but do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscesses are red with part of the oaf, and for this reason one thinks that it is another oaf;
and if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white so that it smells good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the body parts, because its shape is ahead. Then comes those who come after the introducers, judge those within.
Then comes those who come after the introducers, judge those within. And when we cure them with fire, it is necessary that the patient be made well according to his strength and the replenishment of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and put about him many blankets.
then let him sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the probe to one of the two ribs at the bottom of the chest;
then take the probe-leather, and curl it among the ribs at the bottom of the chest up to the knuckle, and cut the leather of the ribs straight with a cut, splitting it as far as the white line, and scorch it carefully according to strength;
Then pierce the skin of the loin with a large sharp needle, and drain all the blood, and then put your knife on it, and keep the skin up; and do not touch the core of the meat, but only pierce the skin; cut out all or pieces separately by its thin part, so that if you do not cut it well, the blood will return.
And if the blood rises to your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the skin; and join together the 21 pieces of meat from the core with a seam, and heal it as you would other wounds, until it is well.
And if you find that the blood is corrupted by another disease, then you must hang the vials [containing the blood] in doubt of the decay of blood; and cut out the core with all the vial, and drain the blood, and heal it as we have said.
And if the blood is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part in the same way as you did the first, and wash the blood, and put it on another wound wet with rose oil.
and dip another piece of wool in wine and oil, and place it on the .ij. folds, and put double sheets over it, and wrap it up tightly according to this form:
Then take 2 sheets, and fill them with wool according to this shape, and join them together by sewing around the crotch of the breeches, and let one shoulder hang down to the back, and the other to the part of the elbow; and the second head on the 2 shoulders, and all are joined together in a loop at the waist of the breeches;
and never is medicine this fire cautery in the place of a iron size, and is that you press 1 cautery with a thin knife, and scrape the leather of the folds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syph that contains the water is uncovered;
then take this fire cautery according to this form, and pierce those syphs once, and scorch them with this thin cautery:
And the cauldron in all ways that you can, until you are exhausted; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move away from the bloodshed of the wound, and be careful about the cutting of the limbs.
and if nothing opposes it, or an abscess or bloodshed or anything else, so heal what opposes you, according to the one who is before said.
and if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, so cause an incision, as I told you, and it is that when you are sure by the meanings that we have said that the ramose water is present,
then let the patient sit on .i. seat lifted; then pierce the abscess in the part of the nose at all the broad spatumile, and place the incision of long the neck; and be wide the perforation, so that all the water runs away;
Then put cotton on the place, and bandage it, and let run the remainder of the water, then heal it until the wound is healed;
And let the white cloth not let the water run out of the wound's mouth, so that you put a feather or an instrument that treats the water of the dropsy into it, which has such form as above; and enlarge .i. p. the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 1v. months or more, and when it is gathered as before, and so the disease passes from the patient his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in this chapter on pain there are many states, for which it seems to me that one must be careful.
and I will tell you about the work of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from the horns and most often from the joints; and this is due to moisture.
It is known that by excess sour water and bitter water, which is spread in the joints or by impact; or
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the horn; and it does not feel pain, and is an abscess of grief; or
and there is a white and sharp abscess with a fever, and never comes out of the artery, or swelling of the vein.
When it is an artery, if it is known by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your two hands; and only touch it.
When it is done by swelling of the vein, it is known by its position on the touch of the two hands;
and one can do well to make a cut on this image, and on the other images; and that you cut off the tips of the claws, then put the claw on high, and make it white with the medicine, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the claw.
If the claw has already been soaked with these images, then it is convenient that you take the claw, and the cut;
and if it is dry at the moment, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is convenient that you deliver all of this, and the cut as well;
And if the birth of the child is behind her, then it is necessary that you take it all out, and remove the membrane, as we have said.
When your work is finished, then apply wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, and then continue with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping that resembles a.i. brougham, with the softening of the testicles, and let the patient groan when he goes;
and treat this disease well in advance with great caution as described above.
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you sit the patient on .i. chair gently, then pour the suspended liquid down his throat with two spoons. All vessels near the penis, and let the masters tan them, and spread them out flat.
then chop the testicles with a sharp knife in a large space where the vessels are exposed, as long as they are uncovered, and
and then scorch each part, as we have said when extracting the arteries that are in the temples;
then put a needle or wire on it where it has come into contact with the first joint, and tie it quickly to the other end; then place the kopps in a medium position, according to the length of the torso, and remove the corrupt humors;
then treat the wound as you would other wounds or if an arrow has lodged, so that no vessel is injured and none of the joints move;
For by this there is no harm done, and all vessels come out whole, so it is necessary to move the joints of all the vessels; so that the oil does not lose its essence due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rupture of the syphyl The symptoms of this disease are due to the rupture of the syphyl, or extension in the abdomen in the region of the bowels, so that the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the loins;
and this rupture is either due to the syphyl, or to the extension of it, and these 18 ways of bodily pain come from: from impact, from jumping, from bellowing, from lifting a heavy burden, and from similar causes;
and the signs when it is an extension of the syphyl, are that it happens little by little, and not suddenly; and the abscesses are even up to the end, lest the medicine presses the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the medicine, that it brings about a sudden painful outbreak, and the abscesses are different appearances, desoiling the skin nearby, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the course to the far side of the medicine.
And there is no time for the circle to move with the intestine, and it is kept back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron has come to fear, for there is no need to hurry.
And the way to deal with this is that you command the patient that he keep the intestines in his hand at the wound, if he can put them back inside. then be careful on his neck between your hands, and cut the bowels;
Then take the cord above, and peel off all the skin of the intestines; then put in place the tail bones of the animal according to what you need to open the wound, and be careful not to hurt the patient;
then scorch the syphilis that is soiled the skin of the scrotum, until the white syphilis hard be uncovered from all sides;
then dip your two index fingers in the juice that soils the scrotum, in the juice that is between the white syphilis that is soiled the skin of the penis, and between the second syphilis;
and part what is behind the penis, and between the second syphilis; and then move your right hand into the armpit of the scrotum, and hold the white syphilis high in your left hand, and dip the tip of the penis in all the syphilis towards the waist; and command to the minister that he extends the penis high, and dip what is above behind the scrotum;
and ask your two to see if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white sfac hard, and if you do not find anything, the bottle in the belly of sode;
then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. fils, and the bottle in the back part of sfac, which is after the skin of the testicles; after cutting, then remove the hairs that appear from the fils, as long as there are .iiij. fils; then put them together one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the sfac, which we have said is sode of the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot of .ij. parts; then wrap the hairs of the fils and tie them together forming of .ij. parts, so that no vassal that nourishes them can enter in our house, that the aposteme comes out; and measure therewith the line according to the first line long two hands. dos and after these two lines leave doy of sheaf which is dismembered the cure for the diseases of the body the great of two.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; and chop in the part which is dismembered the leather of the joints, until it does not run, and the bow, as we have said before; then
and put the moist wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and I put the line that we have said. And no time is cauterized the white sheaf that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decomposition of blood.
For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is for him; and if it delays at the end, he was raised up by hot water, and put on what we have said, until it ends.
Then heal the wound with other healing, until it is completely healed.
from a hernia caused by an excess of flesh
In this recipe I have never seen anyone attempt to make the cure using fire.
And the elder said that it is made in this way, as the rabbit is put together with the vis, and in a similar way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them slightly on the outside.
then cut it in half, and cure the abscess of him who has this, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, as long as he is healthy.
No time comes without rupture in the veins, as we have said, and open them; and do not send any of the intestines out, and if any are sent out, it is little, and repair every hour; and if there is a rupture in any of them, patch it quickly.
and wherever it lingers too long in this place, so as to cause a sore or ulcer, as long as any of the intestines are sent out; and if anyone lingers too long at this point,
and this happens from the expansion of the medicine which is in the arteries, as we said, because it is expanded, then is softened and swollen their vessels and opened;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
and the patient lies motionless on his back between your hands, then coat the site of the cut with larghesse according to the quantity of .iij. dos:
and then take out the medicine which is in the skin that has been cut, and then take the thread and put it on the site of the cut:
and press to the navel, then cut the 19 lines of hair that appear on the top of the head, and cut both sides;
then remove the hair at the back of the head, and do not cover the skin or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the snake in the intestines;
then heal it with the healing of wounds. And when you cover the hair, if the wound is healthy and healed,
the skin is bound, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is mild at this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Several times the skin of the scrotum is softened in certain men, because the hairs that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean him up, to make a cut on his back, and strip the soft skin off the natural skin; then join the 21 strips at one seam, and sewed them tightly or 23 strongly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the excess.
of chastisement
Several times the skin of the scrotum is softened in certain men, because the hairs that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean him up, to make a cut on his back, and strip the soft skin off the natural skin; then join the 21 strips at one seam, and sewed them tightly or 23 strongly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the excess.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are according to these two ways as men: the first is that between the two sex organs it has an opening and a shape like a woman's, and sometimes its urine passes out through the vulva; and the other way is with women, and has on its penis an opening like a man's penis and two sex organs; and the cure for men and women is to cut off the scrotum, and cure it as other wounds; in the second way, in those men whose urine shoots out of the vulva, there is no cure.
of the tentacle
Tentacles are a flexible limb attached to the natural body, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it on their hands, and this is a cure. It is necessary that you burn off the excess of the tentacle at your hand or fingers, and do it lightly; and do not cut off too much, lest there be a wound, then cure with another cure as long as he remains healthy; and with another limb that comes out of the mouth of the wife, and use it, and by chance it jumps out, and is like an ear, and because of this they call it the old "ear disease". If you should cut off the tentacle, as we have said above, then cure it while it remains healthy.
Of accidental falls
Here is the translation of the first line of text:
On accidental falls
Here is the translation of the first line of text:
of the abscesses of the woman
Several types of abscesses can occur in the vagina, including syphilis, pierous abscesses, herpes, estiomenes, fistules, hemorrhoids, and chaut (a type of boil). It is important to note that chaut abscesses, which originate from coiled hair, often cause pain, fever, and redness. When treating these abscesses, it is crucial to allow the patient to rest and alleviate their pain before proceeding with any medical procedures. The patient should be positioned comfortably, with their legs spread apart and their feet supported. Their knees should be bent and their legs pulled slightly towards their chest. Meanwhile, small pieces of gauze soaked in oil or honey (or a combination of both) should be placed over the affected area to promote healing. It is essential to ensure that the gauze does not cover any open abscesses to prevent further irritation. Additionally, it is advisable to keep the patient's skin clean and free from debris. If an abscess has already opened, the patient should avoid lifting heavy objects or engaging in strenuous activities to prevent further complications. The use of a hot sitz bath (a bath designed specifically for treating vulvar conditions) can also provide relief and help promote healing. In some cases, surgical intervention may be necessary, especially if the abscess is deep or has not responded to conservative treatments. It is important to consult with a medical professional to determine the most appropriate course of action.
of childbirth
Mestier is first to the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman hurry down, and desire to smell the air: then the baby's feet come out; then you know that these births are according to the natural figure, and the issue comes out by his head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then lightly press your belly so that the baby comes soon; for when he sits on his head, the second is with him, and the married man of his superfluities by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it comes any time on its feet, and comes strong to the chest or shoulders, and hands, or it comes on its belly, or often, and is turned by chance on its neck, and by other evil shapes; such a thing is useful for dance that she be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how she must help.
If the baby comes out by its head in a natural way, and the woman gives birth with pain, and the virtue of her is weak, then she should sit on a saddle, or women hold her; and pour his oil or fenugreek, cooked, and then pour dance between her two little palm, from which is this figure: And tear the second, and wrap her fingers around her thumb so that the moisture that is in it runs outside; and lightly press your belly as she pees, and if she does not pee, then lightly massage with muskillaige of fenugreek with oil of sesame; then make her pee and shake for an hour, and now the baby. And if his hands come out on their own, then you should gently pull them back a little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and let her legs hang down; then take the seat off the ground, and turn her over, and tie her, so that she does not stand up; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then wrap his fingers around the knife that is placed in front, and pull out the child, and gently press them.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes down on its feet, then you must lift it up. and then turn it slowly, until it is even;
and then spread it out slowly.
As soon as they jump up, if he is told to run, and it makes it shake with cold. If you jump, may God help you.
And if he does not jump as we have said, if the turn is little by little, as much as it is in accordance with its natural shape. For then he becomes light.
And if it does not come in the way we have said, take musk from the tree, and oil of sesame, and gum dissolved, and grind all together in .i. a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then let her sit in cold water until she is completely soaked;
and when she is completely soaked, then let her wear a necklace of mirrour; and leave it on for an hour; And then make it sit in the seat, and then make it shake and tighten its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for now the baby is going to jump. of the birth of the child on its knees When the child comes in this form, if I put the hand on his belly lightly and lightly.
of the birth of the child who comes out wide a hand during It is necessary to plan how to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, if the woman stands and goes;
If she cannot walk, if you make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs straight;
Then arrange the muscovy duck that I have mentioned;
and if it doesn't conceive, then wrap the hand in .i. bandage; then study to bring back the hand; and form the child according to natural shape, and make it stretch, and command that he stretch until he conceives.
of the child's issue at his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I command that the bailiff shake his hand, then turn it little by little, and lighten up;
and when it is even, if you put on the musky nature of alto and oil, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little.
and when you have done this, if the fire sits on .I. seat, and instruct that it swells; and the fire shakes itself. of this same manner to all the second part
of this same manner to all the second part When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you put on the second part at your fingernail, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if he falls on his face and on his neck, so that the cap is removed from him, that it is not held back, and he dies.
then put the child inside, as you have done so far, and instruct the woman that she should not wash herself at all times.
of the delivery of twins. I see that fine ones are born many times, and once in no way; and that is not an unusual thing, and it often happens. Two are strange things, and do not live, if it were not for fear.
I know that they are multiplied, and are devised by the apothecary who devises them, which is related to the badness.
and once in no way naturally as all of us, as we have said.
And if it is a grating noise, as we have said before, and the ball is subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and make in such a way as it may be for salvation. of many children
of many children No more are formed in the marriage of .i. or .ii. or .iii. or .iv. or .v. or .vi. or .vii. or many more up to .xv. and all are formed by measurement according to the sagacious glory
and let the ball know all this, for by chance similar things will happen to him. if it is done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child.
When you treat a woman whose baby has died or her womb is empty, as I said in the division, and if she does not conceive again, and you are forced to work with your hands; if it is necessary for you to know that his wife is of sound health, and has no accidents where she might die;
if it is necessary that his wife be supported on her back, and her shoulders are inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the midwife tear her hair from .iij. parts, so that she may be bedridden to treat herself against childbearing;
then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils made from alfalfa and fenugrec and flax seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these muscles; Then pour the wine lightly into them, then take care that they are not too full, so that they do not burst.
and take care that the wine is not too cold so that it does not run down his neck; if you pour the wine into their eyes or into their throat or into their mouth or into their palate or at the side of their teeth or near their sides,
and if he pours it down his feet, he pours it into his hands and washes his sides;
and he should dye the hair at his right hand, and place the comb between his two hands on his left side, and lightly hold the hair with his full hand, and fix the hair in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
and then fix between .i. another hair, or the tier is in need thereof, so that the dislocations are even;
and then extend evenly from one side to the other, so that they move out, and the hair is held in place, like this:
And if part of it lingers, then anoint the joint with oil on both sides, and pour in that part, and draw out the other part;
and if any part of it lingers, then put this ointment or more high place, and do so until all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot return because of the tightness, then wrap it in a cloth, until all comes out.
and then wrap it in the joint of the foot or at the wrist, and so you must do on the other hand, and at .ij. feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is an acute angle assembled, then you must wrap the spine-tip between your two fingers, and push it out and draw out the sharp point; or you wrap it in the instrument that is called "almidach", from which it takes its shape with the tools or chaplet that comes after this one;
and so make him well as much as nature can. then pull out the bones from the nails,
and if the head of the shoulder is dislocated and held with force, so that it splits, as much moisture comes out as possible;
and if it cannot come out, then cut off its head;
and if it is inflamed in the belly or soothes the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs.
and if it is inflamed on its feet, then light traction is applied, and the treatment at the mouth of the leg is simple.
and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the breast, then you must hold it with your hand wrapped around it; and pierce the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture that is there runs;
and if one of the other limbs is broken, and the head remains, if he cuts off his hand completely from the arm, and brings it up to the mouth of the stump; then he drinks a little wine or water, and eats something;
and if the mouth of the stump is tightened by the scar tissue that has grown there, so that it cannot be eaten or drunk; Ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; And he should treat with damp and greasy things;
And if he is injured on his side, and you can make it even, then treat him as we said with the living child;
And if you cannot do this, then cut it into pieces, and leave none of the second;
And when you have done this, bring the patient who has been taught as we have said in the treatment of abscesses that come into the hip.
and if blood comes forth, so be it washed out with water restraining, and bring other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb had a fetus die, then consult another.I. another on that, and denied it to be dead. After a long time the birth was over, and it grew big, and began to cause great pain.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and I could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and in it put a bone, and after a few days another. I was amazed, for this stomach has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I sewed up the wound, and with my own hands, as long as the woman was improving little by little. and left the woman alone for a long time, and so she became a little better, but her bowels were moving a little from their place;
and I recalled this chapter only that once, when the master tried an unfamiliar thing, and he knew how to help himself.
to bring the woman back to her place
And here comes the first sentence to translate: However, the corners should be thinner than the restraining piece, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube is two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees is two fingers wide, and a palm and a half long; and the three inches are two ajostements of this same tube, which are firmly fixed on one side and on the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
and the two supports are inserted in the mouth of the mare so that it can be opened when the horns turn .
Another shape, in its more subtle and lighter form, is made from oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails; and has two supports, one long and one short, and both two inches wide;
and when you see the mare open to all the instruments, so that the woman lies on the bed, her legs outstretched and her feet hanging; and then fill in the .ij. adjustments adjust together in the marriage, and hold the head of the instrument desos between his cheeks; then operate your hand on all the instrument, as you have done to the nails evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marriage, until the ball moves this which it wants.
This instrument is completely assembled, and the multiples are ready for use; And when you see them prepared, then operate faster, and higher for their quantity.
If ever you don't have the instrument ready, because it is not necessary to excuse yourself.
When the second child is about to be born, you must order the disease to keep its tongue and then make it spit it out, and hold your hands away from its mouth and nose. And if she does not, it is well.
And if she does not, it is well. If he [the child] does not, take a pot or cup, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, as chamomile, marjoram, dill, anise, fennel, and centaury;
all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a cup or lid on the pot, and another one over the mouth of the mare,
and the ringworm until the vapours come out of the marris; then the cure is to shake it, as we have said. If a second operation is not done immediately. And if it remains after this cure and is not cured, order the patient to soak his left hand in olive oil or in muskeg of alder, and then pour it over himself.
and the second one; and when she has found it, if she grabs it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not come out at the extraction; But it is necessary to move lightly from side to side, then to twist; and so he will come and dislocate himself again.
And if the mouth of the wound is dry, we have said the cure of sweating, and of inhalation of herbs;
and if she is not of all that we have said, keep in mind that you do not fool around when you twist;
but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the wound, you put him in the cunt of the woman, then cauterize with oil of four-fold armature;
If it is dried out, it will be well again; but if it is wet, then when she swallows, a bad smell comes from her stomach and head, and makes the patient ill.
If it is appropriate, then smoke that can be used for this should be prepared; no one has tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs yet.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one if it is this:
And it is like a dog's head, and put the subtle crown in nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and the steamings on the coals, and the scurvy while it is spent, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but they are treated by a subtle and skillful physician. if it is necessary to pierce the foundation at the bath, that the subtle physician pierces it with his right hand, and does not touch it with his left hand, and sews up the wound where he has pierced it.
Then put it into another milk, wine, and oil; then the cure for wounds until he is well.
And if you doubt that it will not improve, then put a piece of string around it and leave your hand open, and let the bone heal when the wound is open in the chamber.
And there shall be no sudden improvement in the wound or abscess; if it is a sudden injury, then cover it immediately: if not, treat it with the string mentioned above.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas which come from the fundament are nodations, and grow more than those which come from the fundament depart, or in the space of the .ij. parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is old, if it is opened, and soon wet with white or subtle blood, or a little movement of the head causes it to come out,
and these fistulas never persist; and they are known by that which comes out of him when he makes an excretion, and sometimes in salt water or wind when the patient exhales, and sometimes in a spring.
And if there are fistulas that pierce only up to the bladder, and only up to half the length of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the testicles, and up to a few inches of the chest.
And so recognize the fistula penetrating to the fundament, and not penetrating. and so stick your second finger or fundament, and stick a small needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
And if it has twistiness, if you stick a small piece of string, or for instance a horse's hair, as long as you feel the string or hair in your finger;
and if you don't feel it, and there is neither an exit nor a twisting or twisting sensation, as we have said: That it does not pierce, so that you do not hurry to heal.
And when the fistula is piercing only until the bladder or only until the conduit of urine, so that if urine leaks out, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
If it is pierced only up to the joint of the cunt, if the testicle is brought back up to its place; if there is no twisting and the pain in the entrails is acute, if he has already been brought back to his place by means of a bow, and there is no need for medicine or stroking by hand;
and in these fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish mirth that entangles them.
In those that are not persans and are not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, so
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and bring his legs up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his stomach, so then pour water from an arc or a pitcher if there is a twist in it, as long as you know where the arc comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the root of his tongue, then you should put your index finger there.
then know that the taste is lost; and if you can feel between your thumb and finger or in your mouth, then you will know that it is bad. if it does not cause a change in the taste, then you cannot cure it.
All the same, one can sometimes cure some of them well, but this happens little;
and let the aid which we have made, if it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and pour the bottle all hot in the fistula, as long as it comes gently from the foundation; and do this .ij. times or .iii., as you know that these hairs grown are burned, which is like an owl's feather;
and then the doctor of tent-moistures wet-dries, as long as that hair grows; and then the doctor of ointment in a jar stirring it and sticking it.
If it is thus healthy, it is good. But if not, it cannot be healthy;
and if you pierce only to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and place between your two fingers a thick cover of cloth or of silk, and you see the fistula on the side that holds the cover tight; if the patch of the encumbering of the fistula, and stick fast before the tent, and put the cautery after, as long as it comes to the top of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and will go away; then take off those silk-like tents that seem like a feather of an owl, and there will remain nothing of them.
And if the sun does not go away, and cuts between you and the work, then the fire cautery or medicinal poultice.
For fire cautery brings together .ij. things: namely, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and removal of moisture;
and then cure wet tents by drying them out or by burning them, until the leaks stop, and heat these joints in the fire in the leak;
and then cure the wound with dry herbs that burn in the fire, and let the medicines be dry.
For once it is healed, then it is well and no longer returns.
And if a fistula comes just from the foundation, and is distant from the heart, it will bottle up two or three times, and inquire that.
And if you feel the itch, and between iij is the thread or string or cord, or it is ready to pierce, there are only two ways of hope and expectation, through the administration of one of the iii. ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you put on a poultice and treat it as first;
and do not go too far with the cauterization, so that you cover the foundation and come by the voluntary way of excretion; then the doctor, as we have said;
then the doctor, as we have said; For in case he will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it up completely from its foundation, whether by attempting or by another instrument aimed at; then the world's fine sand which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: that is lighter for the patient.
And there are no times of ulcers according to this way: and it is when you plug the tent in the ulcer, and she is or coasting douz foundation deleze the leathern above, if one takes a tent torn at the top according to this form: and I pour one thread twisted in two, and I plug the tent in all the thread in the ulcer as long as it is at the top.
If it is persistent at the base inside, then extract the thread of that torn, so you plug your two or base foundation;
and join together the two heads with thread, and hold them apart from each other, and leave them for one day or for two days;
and do not restrain it once, until the thread holds these joints together that are between two, and they grind;
then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed over.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too completely hidden.
For it is not right to make a covering bandage without first making the wound perfect, and then treating it, as we have said, until it is well.
The form of the spikelet from which one makes a fistula is sharp and has a point; part it and cut through it. And on the other hand, for this reason one should not cover with a bandage what one must not cover, as you see here:
Here is the translation of the provided text: and some have one or more, and those that are distant from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are distant have little moisture, and
and then cut close together or a little apart, or a little water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh; and
and the cure for those who have them within the foundation, so you command the patient that he defecates in bed until the foundation goes away and it comes out; and If you hurry, and hold it with your fingernail, then cut it into its roots.
and if his nail does not hold them because of the moisture, then take them from the .i. drapeil, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and remove them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire of cauterization; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization with chapister (a kind of substance), then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy again;
and if his foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hot cautery, and sharp, so that it washes what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
When the patient has been burned, and his hair is burned away from his foundation, then the cure is light; and you should hold them in your nail or with tweezers, and pull them out, then cure them as we have said, until they are well, and avoid the incision with iron.
If it is necessary that you bring the stitch together in this way: take a twisted thread, and put it through an needle, and then draw the thread up from the bottom of the needle, and push the needle through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread over the needle and if it is a large one; then draw out the thread, and tie it, and take out the needle, and do so with all of them, and leave only one . i . for drawing away the surplus blood;
then wrap it in a cloth wet with oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, if he is cured with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
Douiciously at the end of the foundation Many times there is drying up of the ends in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
If you should come to the point of a scalpel or your fingernail on top, which does not leave it to moisten; then heal it as soon as it is sore, as it should be;
and if it cannot be healed, then shave it more strongly than before, until it heals and is scorched; and treat him until he is well.
the sweat is a small brown stain on the skin, and goes well with much of the dress;
and it does not hurt the patient at all, and one can feel it even through clothes, and comes throughout the whole body, and especially to the hands compared to elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a strong vulture, and place that feather on the wound, until the purple ring surrounds the entire wound. Then turn your hand around all the feather until you have surrounded the wound completely, and place it in place, and then clean the wound from its roots.
And if you want to make a cautery with fire or iron according to this form, and be careful not to burn yourself, and do it slowly.
Do not cut, but rather pinch between your fingers, and press: And if you want to cauterize the wound, as it is described in front or with cauterizing chapiter.
of the form of the cyst No one should make silver or mercury enema, or melted gold or brass; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to those who are treated.
Therefore, for the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, these are small.
The form of the cyst is small and large if it is over the belly, or tied according to this way:
and I saw one distension where the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the ribs are pierced from within; and at one of the sides there is .ij. perforations, and on the other side .i..
and let the belly be filled with a capsule of honey or parchment, and let it be pierced all around the small openings.
and between each opening, place 1/10th of a space, then pour in these openings a strong twine made of cow's intestine, and tie the belly together as if it were a sheep. and when the medicine is inside, if the string is in front of a strong instrument, then cauterize it; and it takes on the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive or of castor oil or a similar substance, then pour it lightly.
and the minister holds them together with his two hands until it is completely full, then remove the oil, and raise the patient's legs to the wall,
and let the medicine flow out, as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater aid.
And if you cauterize him because of a disease that comes from the inside of the belly, and the medicine flows out quickly, if he goes back to the same thing as often as he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, then also the clister is too thin like a child.
and this is the form of the clister that is too thin so that the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; but now we will speak of the cures of hands and medicines, according to the fulfillment.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and because of this they are made.
Things that cause wounds are by the slitting of a stone, and the hewing of an axe or a knife or a spear or a lance or a fust or a sledgehammer or similar objects; or
or where the body parts are cut according to their places, such as a wound that bites into the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder will come in my chapter.
I say that when a simple wound appears where the head is, and the bone is not broken, take care that it is from the movement of stones or similar things, and the skin is torn everywhere, and the wound is great, and you doubt the burning of an abscess: if you do not quickly heal from blood loss caused by the wound, and you heal on the opposite side of the injured part;
and you prevent the patient's replenishment with wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not quickly heal, if his meat is reduced, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
and over the wound, if it is a hot sore, cotton wetted with oil of rose, or with wine as astringent;
and if it is not a hot sore, and over the wound, if it is fresh, without moving with the air, powder, which I will call a little further on;
and if it has been moved, and over some herbs, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, as long as a sword blade and similar things, and the lips cannot be put together by tension, if they are put together by sewing, as I will say to wounds on the belly, from the sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and there is little blood, then bandage the wound with cloth only, and return it to its place. And instruct the patient to eat large, solid foods, such as roasted meats, grains, and similar things.
And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut it off completely and throw it away, and then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which, without stopping, and he cannot stop it with medicine, then find the artery, and if you find that it is dislocated, then bind it with a thread. and if this does not benefit him, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood .ij parts; live coal .iij parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and the bandage forms, as long as it dries well and sticks to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unhindered if it does not swell, for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time does one use salt at all, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the arm does not move the wound.
And if the arm has moved the wound, even a little, one must then use this powder;
but put on some oil infusions that have been prepared, or peas of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it is warm; then the doctor prescribes other remedies until he is cured.
And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers;
and I will tell you this afterward about the fractures of the head.
of the wound at the throat
If the wound is in the neck and is simple, there is no difference between it and that at the base of the head, but if the artery is cut.
If it is at the base, then there is no other remedy but to leave it alone and not put anything restraining on it, for it harms the base and makes it retreat. and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the base is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but either make the medicine hot, as hot water in mild water, and mixed with rosewater, and also wash it with mild water, and other stones from my body according to this method, and oil with moisture.
If the wound is large, if the bandage is too loose, then treat until it is healthy.
If the wounds are deep and the hair is shaven and full of bowels, if the wound or deeper;
and if the artery is cut, and pain in the heart comes, if the darkness, and the fever, and the cauterization is necessary;
and if the throat is closed, or a hole made there, and the direction is kept, so that the meat goes down. if the hole is cut high up on the neck, and does not touch the throat but sets it back to its natural shape; and then let it rest for a few days, and then treat it with oregano until it is well again;
and if the wound has affected the bone, then rub it; and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't handle them all, and those that you can't have, let the wound rot. and be careful and firm with the issue;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the chapistle.
of the wound from a lance or sword
If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if there are any signs of life in it: know that such a wound is deadly.
And if it isn't deep and the wound is fresh, then in the first hour don't apply powder or bandage to the wound that wouldn't hold it in place until it heals perfectly. and rest, and take care of the patient. but I have a remedy for this, and the leech 13 times a day;
and if you do not have a wound, put wet cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and let the patient lie on the wound 13 times, or 23 times, or more; if there will not be a spasm, nor a malevolent tremor of the heart from which no remedy is found; and when you see such good arrangements, know that the wound is safe. Heal the wounds of tents and other cures, as long as he is healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and if surgery is necessary, then know that there is a fistula; and if the cure is done as it should be.
And if the wound is made with a knife or sword, and it is simple, or deep or at the back, then know how to heal what is before it;
If it is large, use sutures; and if it is small, use powder, and if it has penetrated the bone, and split it into pieces, then treat the wound, and if they have become infected. and if they are not infected, then allow the wound to fester, and then perform extractions;
and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
and the rupture of the womb
The rupture of the womb is great and painful and small.
From a great wound does not come once the intestines, or the intestines go into one another, for this is the introduction of pus.
And the suture is more difficult, and there is no benefit from a small wound compared to a large one,
For if we do not put the intestines back together again, we should put them back together piece by piece; for this reason the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they return to their base,
and for this reason the wound is closed, so that it heals well, if we keep the intestine in place as with the others
And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways:
the common seams have in the seam of the abdomen,
and he sews up the other wounds of the chest, and .ij. other sutures are common to other wounds;
and moreover they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is foreseen, and a grating thing is to remedy it, this is by one of the .ij. ways: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or that the intestines are swollen by cold.
and when it is cold, heat it in a certain way: moisten a sponge or .i. cloth with lukewarm water, You boil in acrid squishy and cypress and spicing. and let the intestines rise until they are swollen.
and at no time does this water restrain, and it is rotten that its soul is enflamed by fever.
And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with water or brew them, and if the spicing is cooked, for for this reason the entrance is closed to little things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the place with the instrument where we cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to moisten it so that it bleeds; that we do not cut it unless there is a great need;for for this cause li chapistre est plus usé, par ceu qu’il peut faire venir la sanglerie de ses membres, et que li malaides sent le douleur moins;
and this is the instrument for breaking:
If it breaks in towards the corbière and doesn't go out, and see the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, If it is reset according to the natural form in its own place, If you can, for this is of great value.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head, and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and if it ruptures the belly in one of the two parts, if the navicular bone is higher than the other in this case,
and thus one must treat what I have said, in great wounds and pain.
For small wounds but also this
and then place your hands above the wound, and pour on the patient some minister of pitiable medicine that covers the whole rupture with its power. and gather the lips together. and this is the common method of suturing.
and this is the common method of suturing. and that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two inches at the top of the wound, and I insert a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the two joints of leather with the two joints of string,
then strain out a double thread through the needle from one side, then bring together the 17 seams of the wound towards the front,
and then leaves .i. two of space, and he puts another needle; then he lays the thread out so as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles, as long as all the wound is closed.
and let the needles fall, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles will fill all the gap, and the very coarse ones can't enter well: For this is necessary that they be moderate in size.
and it is not good to push the needles too far from the hair and the hide.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;
and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient when they sleep, and I put tents or drapes at the heads of the needles so that they keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sealed;
and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it needs a needle or .ij.
The second method of sewing is common, and are joined together with a strong thread that cuts easily; and when you have perceived these things together,
and when you have perceived these things together, if we return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you cut the threads;
and place a space of about half an inch between each stitch, twice as thick as a hair;
this stitch is for the king,
and I sewed a wound that had a honorable form or belly,
which was slashed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was made of well-formed intestines that were about iij. palms in length,
And this wound was in the belly. I brought back the intestine, then it had been 21 hours.
and this wound was sewed up after 15 days, and I healed it, and it was cured.
And the mirror showed that he was dying, and it was a wonder;
and do not heal it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is no cure, nor any medicine. and apply cotton wool to the wound nine times a day, and wash it with honey water as long as it was healed.
Or I will tell you the nine proper ways to stitch:
take the needle, and thread it from the outside part all the way inside;
When she has bitten the hook of justice, if you have twisted or pulled out the needle
and made it pierce from another part from within towards the outside;
and this sound of this stitch should be that you sew like the furrier sews the fur; and leave the hook on one side, and pick it up on the other, until the stitch is completed entirely.
The second method of stitching, which Galiens performed properly,
is if so that as any font, who assemble the .ij. parties together naturally, and apply one of the chief to the other chief, in such a way:
file an agdle or chief of mirach nearest, and pierce that alone only, and leave the .ij. shoulders of the sheep; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside towards the center, as .ij. shoulders of the sheep;
then pierce one and then the other from the outside towards the center, in .ij. other chiés dou mirach that are on either side of it;
and this is the common way of binding up and the most used.
Here are the lines from the text:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and know that when the rupture is in mid-belly, is the stitch more painful than others of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds:
and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it. if you reset the intestine and cut it, then put powder over it with a cloth.
if you reset the intestine and cut it, then put powder over it with a cloth. and if it moves again, then put it on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and chop off the hair, and seal up the skin, and smooth it out; then treat the wound like this, until it is healthy;
and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to go out, cotton wool, and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
For you do not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will join the main members, if it is necessary that you moisten another light thing in oil of thyme or rose oil, and place it between the knees, and cut off the toes;
and if it feels pain or itchiness in the belly, and often happens, if the black wine tarps, and sometimes the itching comes up to the intestine;
and the perforation inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The intestinal tract called "Jejunum" cannot be healed once it has been torn. For its origin in the veins and for the subtlety of all the body, and because it approaches nature's essence.
And if the scar jumps out from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine is fresh, while it is still alive.
and if it is old and turning towards black, that you lie the place which is black, that do not come from blood there for it has veins and arteries;
and then cut who is between the lien, and place the two heads pendant des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l'estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.
of the rupture of the bole
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some way,
for I have seen that a noble person was struck by an arrow or a lance from the belly;
and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and flatulence;
I treated it according to what I could learn, and I did not cease to treat it until it was healed, and I sewed up the wounds.
And when I saw the wound sewn up, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly; and there is no harm, but delay in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and they said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in some way: take some flesh from a large testicle, then join the lips of the wound, and when the flesh has opened the mouth, so he puts it on the iij lips,
then put .I. another wound after in that way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and bandage the wound; If they burn within the bowels, and cause no harm to the patient.
and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this manner: take the end of this thread of intestine that has been cut off, and then lay the thread of this cloth .i. linen thread fine twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and bring it back to the rupture;
and this method of sewing with strings is only useful according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the small intestines, there should be no waste, but subtlety.
of the fistula or where it is is called "fistula" universally when it has come to light. and most often when it has been cut and a bow has been made.
And the fistula is according to the vertue of the hard and white nodulation, or there is no pain felt, and is also like a bird's beak;
and never clear in salt water, but thick in fresh water. and never pokes, but is enough.
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no healing. This is the translation of the text:
Here is the first sentence translated into English: Here is the translated text line by line: Here is the translated text line by line: Where there is too much bowing. Where the leather is rotted, and the material is of bad quality; Where the medicine is not good for the cure; Where by chance the corruption is a way of pestilence; where by virtue of its location late digestion, and late health, and flee by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have largely spoken of these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Or it is appropriate that I make you know the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands.
I see that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body. for there are fistulas that come from great veins and arteries and nerves, or in the syphillous person, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are difficult healing, and there is only work and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level that I have said, and you have promised to heal it, and if you see it clearly, take a piece of rawhide or iron, if the fistula is straight, look at it;
and if the fistula is twisted, so that the search for a subtle hook of plucking For the plucking plies fold inside the twistiness;
and if the fistula is torn and you cannot easily search for it with hooks, then let the cautery fire run along one of the tears,
For moisture is very short of one hole to another, and cleanses it.
Then cut it carefully at your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved off,
and ask the patient very well about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you really know the location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein; Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation of the provided text: "And bone was the false work and the corrupt carcases that were within;" "and then the cure as long as she is sound,"
"and if the fistula is well profound from the right place, so that you can cauterize it completely, as well as you can," and I dip them in medical water until they reach the head of the fissure.
and I dip them in medical water until they reach the head of the fissure. until the medicine corrode the excess that is stored at the bottom.
and then I dip them in a mixture of garlic and sweet wine, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healed by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
And if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then let him cover it. For in the vein or neck do not hurt or main members, as we have said;
and if his nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, let him wait until the corruption is all bone, then heal of things injanrans chara as long as he is sound;
and if he is not well, and return bow as before, because you have not yet reached the source:
if you discover and examine as much as you can while at the source, and then you will be able to say whether it is true or false that you have not yet reached the source.
and if he is thus made well, it is good. If not, know that decay is too complete so you cannot come there; if there is no other means but to nature's way;
and if there is a small bone putrid, and you can pull it at the claws, if they prick at their base
and if they have several bones, and treat them roughly, do not leave any one of them.
and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, if heat and moisture and care, and deliver the bones.
And if you do not remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that will cause corrosion. and leave until the hairs are rotted around the bones,
and then much more easily will the bones come out;
and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh; if you go so far as to let the corrosion persist until the blackening is completely bone, and then restore the wound;
and if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes down to the bone; if it suits you and you cover all the way up to the corrosion, and then treat it until it is solid;
and I will tell you of a fistula which came to a man in his leg, so that you take an example and help with your work.
There was a young man aged between 18 and 24 years old who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
As the matter came to the leg, and escaped through a large abscess, and had no obvious cause for opening;
but the mirror because of their madness they went up so much over that apses opened. and when they corroded matter, and became a fistula, and I came from the perforations that all discharged bowels and moisture from the body;
and many I healed within two years, and I had no skill in the art of hands,
For as long as I was called upon, and saw a leg and the medicines with which it was treated, and he who runs through the gaps with great speed; and his body became red in youth, and had an amber-colored skin.
I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then searched all the gaps
and I found that one came together from the other on both sides of the leg.
I hurried then, and dug into one of the cavities as far as I could see a part of the bone. and I found it rotten and decayed, and the decay went down to the bone;
I knew what this bone looked like that had rotted and I was sure that there was no other decay in it except for the one that I held;
and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and I could not heal it;
and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before,
and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the rot, and then I held it, and I leaned to weld the joint;
but I could not as much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I carried it away from all sides; then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and firmly welded together,
and do not think any longer about opening, except for the weakness of the disease, which cannot bear it, and for fear of death that I had of him. For with bloodletting there was often evacuation, but he was completely healed,
For with bloodletting there was often evacuation, but he was completely healed, and he gave birth to a hard bone in place of the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite in all things, nor did he have any pain or trouble.
and let the head stand still, so you pull the cart rotten to the back. and uncover the cart on the ground where you see the rope, that the rope does not damage the cart; and put .i. a piece of wood or a tree trunk down on the ground so that it supports the cart, so the cart does not rust; and come as soon as you can see and feel the corrosion, and come again sometime else.
And if his bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole carcass; then put
and then make a cut from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the liquid run out from the long cut of the corruption;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then chop off the joint; and if the bone contains it on one side, let it run out on the other side;
and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, then there is no other inflammation than that of copper.
and if corruption is where the hand is pricked, or where the foot is pricked, then this thing is very strong, but you must also inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean yourself in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you;
and knows that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the shape of the bone and appearance of the teeth. and their size and fineness, and their height and length, and their hardness. and for each kind of work, there is the appropriate tool.
and knows that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you take a tool that is suited to this
Take fire The head may be dislocated due to pressure within or due to displacement.
and when you have medication, this corrosion by the remedy of medications, and it does not benefit at all, if it is covered that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, and it seems that it is burned by fire, and then after the blackness, then go those corrosions of a member to another member. and take it all over the body; if you hasten to cover,
and if it is by the pounding of some poisonous beasts, like sea scorpions and eels and similar things,
then go that corrosion to the top of the head, if it covers, and do not give it space to come out until the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cap goes to the joint, so that the rust does not come up only to the arms;
and if it comes to the arm, so that the cap goes to the neck; and if it passes the neck, then is death, and there is no need for a more detailed description of its quantity except for its virtue;
and if it comes to the first joint, and if the cap goes after the other joint;
and if she comes where the foot is, so cover all the foot; and if she ascends in the leg, so cover at the joint of the knee;
and if she comes above the knee, so there is no other way but to let the patient die with ease;
and the way to cover or sew the member so that you bind it above and below, and extend one of the ropes downstream, and another minister extend the other rope upstream, and you remove the cart that is between the 18 ropes to the wide spatula, until the bone is uncovered;
then the cloth or silk, and place on each side a linen drape, so that the silk does not touch the ground; and bring the patient other wound and abscess treatment and care.
And if the blood runs out when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly. or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then wrap the member with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is well;
and I will tell you that there was a good man at home who:
there was a blackness which seemed to be burnt by fire,
and this corrosion came first in its degree to the foot, so that it stained all of the foot;
And when the honor saw the corrosion, it became covered with copper on the foot, and was healed;
and after that time the corrosion came again to my hand, and came to me,
and I put it on things that reflect after purifying the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
and he said that I should chop off his hand, and I did not want to, that I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die; For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his country, and he holds his hand off with copper, and he was healed;
and I have not told it but for the sake of telling something else, if one needs to do it.
For in the middle of the body there is an abscess that remains for a long time and causes great accumulation of pus; and then it bursts and leaks, and its contents flow out, like the veins of our servants; and the leather which is above it is just as delicate as a tapestry of reeds. nor should they touch the bone nor the nerve, and such sickness is called "healthy".
but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a  "fistula".
and the cure is that you take care of the skin all around, and most especially when it is thin, as much as a drape. and don't burn for its corrosion.
And if you have promised that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not perfect, and the skin is like a vessel, so the cure of the clister is inside:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: Therefore, the use of Egyptian medicine which is made in this way: take equal parts of oil and linseed, mix them together, and put them to cook on the fire in a vessel, until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey.
and then take from this according to your need, and the medicine is made of water and honey, and in the cauterization of the breast, and extract the hernia. and leave the medicine to be extracted after .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
make this water twice, until the breasts are firm, and the milk comes out;
and never is clisterized by water of ash, When this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top,
then pour it out, and clisterize it, until you know the milk is well foamed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine, nor water of ash; if the cautery of water and honey or it has a little bit of lead powder crushed; or you soak it in honey and wine, that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the pain lighter.
and when you have done this, and you have promised that the sins are well purified, If the cautery of fire is applied to those who have just given birth,
and if you press it with oil and rosin and make it with wine; or you apply the cautery of fire to certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs;
and if it is placed on the skin it is small, and the cautery of fire cannot enter; If a little bit of fire is expanded, and put on a tent of Egyptian ointment, or Basilican ointment, as much as it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the ointment can enter,
and if the hole where the arrow entered is higher up, so that the cap or lower part is positioned For when the bow is at full draw, if it does not let go of its target. and if you cannot cover the eye with your hand as well as you see, so that the bow goes to the lowest point possible for it.
and if you cannot cover the breast with your arm as you see fit, then adjust it in such a way: so that the bowstring runs smoothly down, and leave nothing of the bow. and take medicine that hardens it, to put over the breast,
and are on a .i. drape of linen that covers the whole breast; and then measure the width of the chest on either side. i.e. the wider it is at the first, then put a patch above it on. i.e. another cloth according to the quantity of the chest, and put it on the chest from side to side in order to fasten the bow, and don't take off the large cloth for a long time after a day has passed;
and the one that is on the chest from side to side, often takes it off in order to take off the bow, and if there is venom or poison or enough of it, or if it has been digested, or not digested.
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when the medicine has spread in some way throughout the cavity of the chest and you see the nature of what rises from the lungs, if you see that the lungs are moving, and bring the medicine near them;
and then let it down in the morning, or third day, and when you lower the wound, if there is a change .i. another bandage, and renew the dressing.
And if the breast becomes irritated after many days, know that the breast does not ache. And if subtle poisons last a long time, so do not despair of health,
For the saint is approaching. For there are men whose late healing of wounds, and those that do the opposite.
and they bow their heads down after many days, for their sin does not burn.
and their sin is late to be heard and is punished, so prepare medicines of moistened substances dried in utility, so that it may be used, for there is a great deal of vinegar, and it is the last medicine;
Take care, and make a paste with oil of rose, and aromatize it with equal wine.
then bake and apply it; and that same thing, made more fragrant by cooked honey, enriches. When the initial care is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it comes out of the fire; and then, with a patch of cloth, and lay it on the breast, and never administer any alcohol or herb long-term, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred
and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred and in simple or compound uses: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it; and let it cure for a long time, and is not cured by this cure,
and let it cure for a long time, and is not cured by this cure, Then you understand that corruption is perfect, and causes impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs. if the doctor of the cure of the fistula, if as we have said before.
of the fingernail
is a nail that grows out of the corner of the nail bed on the hand Here is the translation of the provided text:
and when it is put to bed, and one does not take care, so it comes. I.I. an abscess develops, and cut and get a little so that it cuts the root of the nail, and by chance cuts all of it;
and comes corrosion up to the bone, as much as it brings painful pain, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color runs away.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you cut off all the excess that has been delayed from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if his fingers press hard on the chest, and begin to prick, and burn. if you put a ray of light on the finger that pricks the chest, and pour it up high, and gently and lightly pour this subtle liquid. and put on top of the remaining liquid on the chest burning and corrosive remedies to destroy everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, so remove it and treat it firmly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed.
and if you see the deformity, so remove it with a chisel as described before. and the doctor of remedies as long as he is healthy.
and if it is wild, and bruised, and it hurts greatly, then you must heal it first. then cut the nail with a chisel from the side,
and be careful that the nail does not come off too far from the nail bed, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if there is something, put something on it to calm it down.
The two of you should work together so that the baby is born in a man's hands; by chance it may be all flesh. and by chance there is some bone there and no nails,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in both of us. Those who are born without one testicle do not move. and those who are born with both testicles may move.
the size of that which is charnous so is light, in some way: the size of that which is charnous so is light, in some way: taille le en sa racine d'un large spatumile.
Cil who is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure: if you hold them with copper.
In those who are born or must be tied at the derriere, it is necessary that you first cope the cheek roundly up to the bone, Then cope the bone with a suitable thread for this purpose, and then cure it as long as it is healthy.
The joints that come together by nature, either by birth or by the assembly of wounds, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you are to make this leaden cast, so that it repairs according to its natural forms; and then place between two sheets or drape them with oil and rosin, so as not to stick together; or you may place between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are fused together, as is customary.
The process of fusing together the two pieces of linen is known as "sewding", and it is done with the palms of the hands, as is customary. The leaden cast should be made in such a way that it fuses together with the linen, as is the usual practice.
The evil ones
The evil ones are huge envelops filled with excessive melancholy that come from the limbs of the body.
and more are found in the legs of those who walk on their feet and work and carry things, whereas others...
It is therefore necessary that you do not at any time take any kind of medicine that makes the bowels move, and then heal from the Basilica.
The cure of iron according to the following 19 ways: one is that you make the cups, and draw out the black blood; and another way is if you find the vein, and draw it all out.
The cutting according to this method: arise the first leg with very hot water until the large vein is visible, and then strain the leg of the sick person from above the knee to the part near the ankle joint; and cut the vein in .i. place, or in .ii. or in .iii. a size of broad,
and then draw out and pull firmly the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure;
and then tie it, and instruct him to dye his meat with black wine;
and then start the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are empty, and leave the patient.
Here is the translation of the provided Old French text into English line by line as requested: Then dip it in water and heat it until it turns red, and swell up the veins;
and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then dip the part of the leg near the ankle at the hip joint, or in the part from the knee to the foot;
then dip the skin into the vinegar, and peel away the vein of each part, until it feels when you touch it;
and she appears red and black, and when she enters or leather so seems as a white cord;
then fill the channel with oil until it is raised from the leather, and then put it on a light scale;
then coat it with another oil in excess of three drops; then scorch the leather on the vein until it appears; then let it raise up, as you did, and put it on another scale, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou pied,
then take another size, or more often you need it, then cut it, and cut it in two at the foot, then stretch and cut to the second size; then extract one size after another until it is all gone, then cut it off;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then fasten it with a strong double thread of thread; and cut it and stretch it, and tie it with a knot, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is all gone; and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, neither can we pull nor lift it, and this will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, place wet wool in wine and oil on the wound site, and tend to it until it is healed.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and does not stand upright, as we have said, then you must split it open with great care, but do not cover it; and tend to it as we have described above.
then you must split it open with great care, but do not cover it; and tend to it as we have described above. The shape of iron which one covers the vein if it is curved, and does not cut it except to cover the vein.
and is a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance happens elsewhere than in the legs, and this is due to the porridge that comes off the skin.
if it comes into the body twisting and turning, slip between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this disorder are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation, Then the legs change, and the disorder begins to come out, as if from a root of a plant.
When the head is open, if it is necessary that you wrap a piece of cloth around the neck from one third to half up to three-fourths.
and leave the cloth hanging at the leg, and every time that it is a point to go away, if the wrap around the cloth and the new one. and if it is too far, if you take a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover its root entirely, until it is all wrapped up; For if you take it, if it enters in the chest, and brings about abscess and decay where it is, and bad disease;
for as for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the top, and there remains nothing or horns.
and never once does this vein when treated with long palms or fingers. and then there came to me one who was 100 palms long, and when you chop it, if it is cut short or damaged, and it is pierced up to the root,
then let it all out; and if the matter inside is empty, and place at its location remedies for inflammation any day, then treat it as for abscesses.
And never by this hand reach to the foot, and least of all when it opens at the joint of the foot or of the leg; and it causes a great wound, and from which there comes much blood; then treat it as we have said before.
of worms that come between the hide and the meat
this disease is called in our country "bovine disease", because it often affects cattle,
and it is a small worm that grows between the hide and the frame, and goes up and down all over the body. and it smells bad at the end of the limb where it went, and it jumps away furiously;
and it is infected with some kinds of fluids, like pus, blood, or other substances, and it is infested with worms or insects that crawl or swim;
and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye; In case of accident, destroy the oil; and this happens many times.
When you see him being cured and extracted, he can only be done so once:
So it is necessary that you place him on a firm bed with a very tight strap:
Then cut him from top to bottom and tra lui further, and the blood will run completely into the pan, and you will not find it: If the fire cautery is applied, until he dies.
and the greatest harm that it does, if it corrects oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the oil, hold back the arm in a straight line, then swing up and throw it hard;
and use the medicine of purification with soluble medicines for the bad humors that may cause disease;
and se warse of meats janranc-porriture.
Of pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and moves from limb to limb; and I saw the one which I told you about.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her breast, and I saw a small swelling on the breast.
and I then saw it grow larger like a worm at the shoulder, much faster than anything, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain leaves the body part, and settles in the shoulder,
and then a little later it corrupts throughout the whole body, until it comes to the other side of the breast.
then he told me that she twisted repeatedly in her body, as I saw it.
I marveled at how much she moved her limbs from one member to another, for I have never seen this disease in this way before. Nevertheless, I have often heard that people with this disease suffer great pain from one limb to another. but I do not want it, if as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry chest, and the veins uncovered, and for this reason it appears that she has constricted windiness;
and does not appear to these who are delicate, and who have moist chests and uncovered veins.
And when you have cured this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limb is raised and firmly supported, and then held in place until the wind is stopped. and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see the blood stop,
if the cure of this disease, which stops the wind, as if it were pills of putrid garlic, and pills of serapint, and similar things.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they enter.
The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and others with small, and some with hair, and some welded. and those with .ij. (20) angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces. and those who bite in any member so according to .iij. ways: or in a principal member bit,
such as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When she bites in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appears: if it is necessary for you to wash yourself of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after a few more preparations; and when there is no sign of badness yet, and the arrow is not fully extracted if it has gone in, then treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow bites and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, is when there is a shock and a sudden turn and a rash on the skin, and inflammation and a rash on the tongue, and muscle spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food. and it may be that there is no breath through the nostrils or ears; and it may be that speech or voice is lost. and from the moist wound there comes white pus resembling blood, and also like smoke rising.
and this sign shows that if you continue with the treatment, and bind the arrow if it is not stuck yet.
For the sign of the arrow when it hurts or stings, it is close to the left breast, and also seems to be lodged in something hard, not hollow. and if by chance the arrow also resembles blood, and dark black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and fainting occurs: Then come doubt that death will come.
And the sign of the arrow that does not burn is that there is no foam from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and he sighs heavily and feels cold fear.
And if the arrow enters the back, then it hurts the small ribs; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move.
And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps there is no flesh hurt from the wound.
And if an arrow lodges in the belly, and it does not go out through the intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or for the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine comes out with a gush and goes away, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and chest and legs and limbs are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it does not poison, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do otherwise.
There was a man who had an arrow stuck in his thigh at the root of his groin. I tried it, and cut off the fat of the ear from both sides, and was healed without any sense of pain.
And I tried another arrow, which went into his thigh, cutting through the fat of the oil from both sides, separating the paper. and the arrow was withdrawn, and I only felt the tip go into his flesh. and this arrow is great of a turquoise arch, to all that is to say lighter than ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accident came.
And threw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic to the ears:
I loved the barbs, and hid them well, and they were healthy for the Christians.
And threw an arrow at a man, which went through his cheek or belly, and I thought he died;
and then he passed .xxx. days, if not he changed his condition; I cut on the arrow, and set it in place, and tied it tightly, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a home with an arrow through it or a hole in its wall, and the wound is sewed up;
and hold the arrow within it, and do not change its natural state, There is no harm in any of his natural works.
And I see another man, to whom he shot an arrow in the face and it was sewed up;
and he remained there without suffering much pain; and many others like this.
And there was a sword given to a prince's man, the king, which had been broken on his neck; and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely pulled out
I was called to treat after she had been injured for three days. The wound was very tight.
I asked her to take a strong medicine, and I did not feel it at all; and she felt pain and a ringing in her right ear. I thought this was from the tip of the arrow
I put on them the plaster with the attractive digestive juice, so that their leeches do not swell. and I saw the leeches of the arrow.
and I saw the leeches of the arrow. I put on them the plaster every day, and quickly heals the wound, and holds back the disease for a long time,
as long as he feels the arrow .i. within his neck; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive medicinal ointment day by day, as long as it was open,
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which had become firmly lodged; then I put on the wound in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow clearly appeared to me;
and well pass the limits of three months.
Then I cut the wound so that the nails came out, and pulled them with force from one side to the other, and could not draw them out.
then I stopped from devising and inventing means of instruments, until I had the nails well made; according to this one that its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I have it cut, and restore the wound.
And I know that the cartilage of the nose cannot be healed. I reset it then, and had it welded, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I will tell you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your cure on what I have not said, for the book cannot include everything;
but the wise men compare on very little thing, and on what is present and deficient, try nine or ten operation, and nine instruments to the removal of foreign things that come in this art.
I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs except according to three ways: either at the place where they enter or at another place;
and that which leaps out from it, for where it enters, that is an arrow entering its flesh, and never leaps out now.
And if it no longer leaps, leave the flesh to rot, and make clean the exit;
And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it thus for a few days, and move it every day;
And then it leaps, and if it no longer leaps, pierce it from within with a sharp tool, as long as the flesh within is soft, and then treat it;
And if the arrow is embedded in the chest so that it cannot be seen, and you want to find it with all your strength; and if you can feel it, then use suitable tools;
and if you cannot by stretching the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, ne has neither bone nor nerve nor vein, so that the wound is as great as possible; and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place, so that the bone is extracted by one-third of an inch from the muscle where you can, and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out.
and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out. and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather draw it out with pain.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, and the ear of the arrow is torn, then draw it out, for extraction is painful. And if the pain of the injection makes you reluctant, then administer what we have said in the chapter about the balm.
and warn against cutting through the nerve and the vein, and do not mention how one might remove an arrow without risk,
or hot or cold, or firmly or vigorously; and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow went in, For this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do so, then set it according to what the sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens nothing, or the leather is swollen in a particular place, if we see or feel it appropriately:
Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as long as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it."
And if it cannot be removed, then let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out. "
and if there is a arrow in it, pound it with all your strength;
and if it must be cut, and you see to administer poultices, for it will administer. I.e., the instrument is a scalpel so that the point of the arrow enters into the hole of the instrument; and then pour out,
and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with a pointed end entering it, in order to celebrate the extraction.
And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the skin around where the poison is, if you can, and then heal the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow enters or is in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, then you may cover it with a cloth, as it should be covered.
and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, as is necessary. and heal it until it is well.
The form of the claws for treating arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and this is how it should be done:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
common veins of the body The veins from which one is healed are .xxxi., of which there is one at the head xvi.,
This is what it means in English: It is known that: .iij. vessels are located behind the ears, which are called the two "herbeche" and the 18 arteries that are in the 18 temples appear. and the 18 veins that are in the 18 hairs of the 18, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is under the forehead; and the vein that is on the top of the neck; and the 18 veins that are at the collar; and the 19 veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich". and the 19 veins that are on the tongue.
The veins that are commonly spoken of are .v. in each arm:
the one is the cephalic, and it lies on the left side, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef"; and the name is called 'fast', and is composed of the cephalic and basilical. And they call it 'vein-cutter'; and if the basilical is on the right side, and they call it 'vein-cutter in the belly', and is on the bright side, and this is what is said about it: it opens clearly on the breast.
And the little finger is the one between the ring and the pinky, and if it has .ij. raindrops on it;
and in the leg and where the foot are .iii veins: one is dislocated at the corner of the pocket on the left side of the calf, and the second which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg are 3 veins dislocated from those.
The head pain of the veins that are behind the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and migraine. and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease,
and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease, and rub the leather where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then strain the disease from his neck with a screw, until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears depending on the head: Keep the donkeys at two, and where you feel the chicken's pulse on your right side, if it is warm, it is a sign of good health.
Then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand up towards the top of the vein. and cut off the skin and the flesh and the vein very carefully. Take two days to heal and rest.
Then draw it out and wrap it up, so that it is healthy.
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause a migraine, and the eyes, and the nasals used to be affected, and in the shape of the larynx;
and the quality of the patient is such that: I say it like this: and it is that the patient pulls his neck out, as long as the .ij. veins appear openly; and send a cold wind from his two feet, and then sign with pain on his throat;
and place the ring finger of your right hand on the top of your index foot, and blow against it from below, and place the vein on top, and the cup, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and let the blood run according to your need;
Then lay the patient down, and place two fingers on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken about its joining and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the facial diseases of old, and for migraine and blindness.
and the quality is that if the patient twists his neck, so that the vein appears. then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is:
and place the tip on the vein, and hold it firm in your hand or another object, and allow two drops of blood to flow out according to the quantity that you see; then cut off the neck, and tie the vein until it is well and firmly tied, and never use a wide flame.
However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, for fear that the bone may break if the flame is too hot.
The blood of the two veins that are in the two eyelids should be let out, and with the eye, and with the fever, and with the yellowing of the face;
and the quality of their blood is that the patient should twist his neck out of any ligature, as before;
then the blood, and let it go through one little piece of a long flame, a little bit wide, for there is no fire;
And if the flames are subtle, by accident if they break; then let the blood go out, as much as you need, and then tie it well on cotton, and tie it well.
The pain of the birth of the child is great if it is in water, and it is sudden, and the diseases of the face are great. If it is a headache and a twinge that comes into the face, and even when it is old;
And the quality of the pain so that the patient strangles his neck, then pulls his baby by the hand with his left hand, and take a thin long flame, and put it on the lip in the space between the iij. nostrils, For the vein does not open well here, and the blood will begin to flow now.
and do not make it too large, and make the blood run according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is soon restored.
This is the form of the fire:
and the quality of health is that the patient removes his hair from both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts off one side;
then heal the vein well and thoroughly, or as much as is necessary;
then mend another in the other vein, then wash the neck and draw out the hair gently; that the patient does not choke; and leave him until morning, that the wound is healed.
of the health of the animals of the health of the lips and teeth, and their care, and the prevention of dental problems and injuries, and the treatment of pregnancy and childbirth.
And the qualities of good health include sitting with the patient in front of you, and holding their throat as I have described. and then turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left. and they recognize it by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins of them which are black: so then turn both sides over, and if you do not recognize it, and you are in doubt about it,
so then turn both sides over, and if you do not recognize it, and you are in doubt about it, so turn the larger one of each pair over as well, and do the same for the .ij. veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
About the health of the throat About the health of the throat:
and the quality of the doctor is that the patient swallows between your hands before the sun, and soothes the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein.
So then heal both of them, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be blocked.
The veins which are commonly cut are operated on in .ij. ways:
with fire piercing in all directions, or with small blades like the veins cut, and is called "aneurism"; and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins. The shape of the fire piercing is called  "mirtin", and is wide as you see it:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are tightly closed with great pain and trouble. and this is the form of the olive fire:
and it is more subtle in point, and it is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow pain.
The healing of the базiliq, which is one of these veins, soothes the throat, and the collar, and the breast, and the stomach;
and it is necessary for the doctor to bind up the wound, and to cauterize with fire the artery that is infected. And if he stops the artery, and blood loss occurs, and it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said; and the flame should not be held, but cut off like a thread.
And if the artery does not open clearly, you must extract it and change it with another one; Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: and dip it in fire, as we have said.
And if you recognize the place of the injury, so that you may extract the arm, and touch the place as long as you know the hair; then sign the place of the injury, and then extract the arm, and dip the wound in fire, as we have said.
and guard against hurting in the artery when you see the joint dislocated, for it is in the artery; then withdraw.
and if you see overflowing up there as the urine of a child, and the sinew is red and thin, know that it is sinew from the artery: then hasten, and put your hand on it longwise, then open your hand so that the sinew does not remain, for it often comes back;
then put your arm in its place, and leave it there, and do not move the limb; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is well.
And if it does not stop bleeding, and he comes to you, and the medicine is not present, if you cut the artery open, for the head of the retort stops it. And stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fig wood, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the other day;
if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops the blood; as we have said,
and the poultices are not made in several places because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of the vein being blocked by the arm's movement.
The blood from the vein is mixed with the medicine that comes from the top of the heart, and from the chest. for it is composed of basilic and cephalic juice, as we have said;
and the surgeon must cauterize the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, the nerve will bleed; and it swells and the patient becomes gray, and may not heal;
and the nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its thinness, then you must cut the nerve with your instrument, and avoid the nerve at your power.
If there is a vein between the two nerves, let it be done with a long blade.
The wound of the cerebral artery if necessary, so that it is pulled away from the head, and helps the hairs;
and it is necessary to wound at the olive flame or at the mirτιν flame, because this is the one that saves all veins, because it does not cut the nerve or artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the easier path, and not grieve if it fails the first time, and begin again. And in case the legs of some men swell, if it fails the first time, but do not grieve. The quality of health is according to your belief.
The first thing you must know about medicine, is that medicine is only necessary to maintain health.
and to prevent the diseases from coming. and let the surgery be done in one of the three veins that are on the head, which are: cerebral, facial and basilar; and you must perform the surgery when the patient is in the state of fast, and in autumn and winter after dinner when the sign of fullness appears;
and you must perform the surgery on the first day or third day, after two hours or three days.
The saint who has been cured of his illness does not have a determined fever, but rather that when he wakes up or eats, in all hours and all seasons;
And it is not good to cure children until they are .iii.. years old, nor women but four months pregnant until the seventh month. Nor should the old be cured who have passed sixty years.
And when some are to be cured, in whatever way, it is necessary that they take a light enema. if he has put his foot out, so that the veins do not attract the intestines' superfluity of poisonous fluid into the main members;
do not cure those who are too sore from meat, or who are bitter, as much as it is necessary, nor those who have dropsy;
and if he is cured after colic passion, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination due to pregnancy or childbirth, watching and fasting, and whatever else depletes his virtue, either through weapons or because of the heart;
and then carefully modulate the humor, for if he is overweight due to meat, beverages, and medications, you have no fault in him;
and then enter the bath, if anything is harmful to him for subtlety of blood.
and keep away from the anus at the back of the thigh, as we have said;
and guard yourself against work, meat, lust, and similar things;
and be lying and jointed, and higher than that which you are kept, and rub the arms .ij. times or .iij.;
Then remove the ligature with care, for when it is too tight or loose, he cannot run without it.
and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
and then moisten the wound with a little oil of olive, and then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding. that the vein not be cut and bleed. For there are veins that run like cords to the heart, and some of these are prone to windiness. so that when one puts it on fire, if one takes it off fire, and cannot open the vein, then one is from those.
and if he opens the vein, if it is too tight a wound, so that one must be careful about these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again a little after that one has been opened or on hospital, if the leeks are swollen.
And if his arm is swollen, and the patient hopes, let him rest a day or two, and do not bind his arm. in case there are abscesses; don't go into the bath, and if it pleases you to continue washing, start again.
and if the dislocation is small, or the joint is slightly out of place, and you doubt that it will hurt as much as you see, so be confident in this dislocation itself to the whole fire;
and work a little carefully, so that the arm is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small:
If you see the wound open, do not instruct the patient to use salt, and put a little of the oil on it, for she smooths out the wound, and is moist in that place where there is the oil.
and apply the oil to each wound as you heal the veins so that it stops the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a triangle and a bow when it is applied to the wound when it is put in place; if it is too thick, then make it subtle so that it does not hurt.
And if there is a large abscess that often comes, it must be done only once when the opening of the vein is small; If you hurry, put on the bed an absorbent sponge wet with water and a little salt, and hold it in place for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days no black or green, so do not harm him; and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh reduced to a juice of calamus, moschate, or similar.
And many times incision and appearance to the health of the basilica: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, that is that appearance. Here is the translation of the provided text:
And treat each of the blood types according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see a lump in it, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are healthy and have need of blood extraction, let them make a larger wound and keep the flames wide open;
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal little by little, and it must be healed by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this method of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is better that the healer does not cut deeply but broadly.
And to one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist wine made from pomegranate juice; if he is heated, if he has a fever, give him three or four times.
And if he has a cold complexion, before the healing, give moist wine made from muscatel, or honey syrup aromatized with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and good-smelling syrup.
And if it is taken to the sea, after the exit of blood, if it happens that it breathes brew of horse, and subtle odorous syrup,
and use other things that we have said in the division or paste of syncope for the evacuation of a vein.
And if it vomits up arms, and sometimes sways, if it is weakened by great swaying, that it recovers little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And if it vomits up arms after the first swaying, and has a strong heart, but recovers after .vij hours after the first swaying, or after the ninth hour.
And who must recover from another side, if he must recover on the second day or the third.
For it has caused blood to flow within the body which has been warmed up, and brings on a fever; if so, draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as you can with your thumb. then that you reward all the conditions of recovery, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, so that death does not come from the palm. and this often happens when recovery is neglected.
and do not suit when you see the arm dislocated, and make it come out with the second time, and the pit is closed, that you press it together; if it is twisted, that he extends the arm carefully, for this would be bad;
but leave it until it heals the second time; or you i point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is frozen at the pit of the vein flows, and put on .i. little bit of salt water, and press lightly.
And if the vein escapes, let it go and do not restrain it, as long as the abscess is calmed down.
And if it is necessary to drain the blood a second time, let it be done in the middle of the vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that emerges in the arm is the same as the one at the base of the head, because it is composed of the same substance.
And the way to use this is that the patient dips his hand in hot water, so that it turns red.
And so let it move smoothly, so that the vein is clearly seen, then cut now inside, not wide nor long.
and let the puncture be wide, and cut well near the joint of the hand, and do not be able to pull it out, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water as long as you have enough of it.
and if it is swollen, do not put the hand in warm water again, for we put it in more when it is swollen than when it is not.
and the cut from this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither an artery nor a nerve.
The salve of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
Extract the hand, and bathe it in hot water until the vein is gone, if you can see it. and wrap it crosswise, and cut off all of it, if it doesn't hurt anything;
and don't chop it too much, because the nerve is all exposed from within;
and then put the hand in hot water, it becomes unstuck in the wound, and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and string on a vein to firmly join it together, and do this for each one.
The surgeon should make a cut in the hand on the left side if the disease is in the small intestine, and do all the rest as I told you before on the right.
The surgeon should cut off the foot if he has any of the diseases that grow on the inside of the body, If, as a result of disease of the mare (horse), there is retention of flux (menstrual blood), and disease of the reins, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient must drink cold water, and rub the vein until it stops. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot goes into the reins;
For the blood goes out at the bottom or wide place of the rain, or at the ankle, which must be held.
And if you treat it on the leg, be careful of the nerves that are exposed, and treat it across as well as when it is in a cup; and let the fire fade away.
And if the wound cannot be brought out, put the leg into the water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if it is treated for the first time, start again for the second time above a little, because the blood is salty; do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other leg equally.
The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its pain goes to the hip, when it is for sciatica.
And the quality of this pain is that the patient goes in or out, and pulls it off the ankle .iii. two in twisting,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so let the pain be in all ways that you can, and going through; and it is worth more than you can cope with, for the leg is out, and it is very painful at hand.
and it is worth more than you can cope with, for the leg is out, and it is very painful at hand. And if you do not cure it, if there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little day, and guard against the cold.
and make so much blood go out that you see it, and then unstring the ligature, and put cotton on it and hold it; now it is healed.
Vacuum treatments
are made of horns, or of air, or of glass; and the treatment with the vacuum is done according to .ij. ways: either by hurting and drawing out blood, or not hurting.
And this ventilation which is not to hurt so it is according .ij. ways: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
and 2 others on 2 sides of the neck; and 1 at the bottom under the chin; and the ventose of the .ij. shoulders; and the ventose on the crups; and the ventoses emmy the .ij. arms; and the ventoses of the .ij. legs; and the ventoses of the .ij. ankles; and the ventilation does not treat of blood, unless it is that of small veins that are scattered throughout the carriage;
and therefore you do not fear any injury, if it is done like the treatment of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be amputated, nor with any fire or hot application in any disease that comes from over-fullness, as long as the whole body is empty.
And if, because of the necessity of disease or habit, it is necessary to amputate, or because of a particular hour in the month, or at the end, and each one in turn;
For there are those who, when they need to ventilate, become very heavy;
and if there are those who, with the ventilation, have paleness and redness on their face and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouths, and have escaped the tongue, and yearn for blood; and if there are such people who dream and see, and feel pain, death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is mid-month, we order them to breathe out after .iij. hours of the day.
The sage of the muse so helps with grief in the chest ... that it comes to the eyes, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation if it is in place of the health of the cephalic,
and it does not come to anything that is of cold disposition in use, or who has chaturd (a word possibly related to "chatur" meaning "impure"), for this does them much harm;
and because of that it does not come to anything that is of a cold disease in use, or who have or head cold diseases.
And those who are healed from it often become confused, and because of that the fire cautery should be put a little further down by the doubt of confusion.
The ventilation of the neck is at the level of the sinus of the head and the base of the skull, and for this reason it causes contraction of the muscle of the spine. and to a split in the channel of the windpipe, and all, and to filling up;
and it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too tightly, there is danger of a chock or stomach or place.
The ventilation of the neck is at the level of the sinus of the head and the base of the skull, and for this reason it causes contraction of the muscle of the spine.
and it is in the place of the saint's bazaar; and it is necessary that you command the saint that he express his hand to put it on, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause bleeding.
The windings of the nose lead to disease in the mouth and decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the saints of the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders lead to a disease that comes from heat and filling up.
The windings of the neck lead as much as the three veins of the arms, For it draws blood from these large veins.
and command the surgeon that he does not cut too deeply, for the arteries and veins are bare of hair, and it is easy to cut into them.
The suction cup that is on the back so easily rips out the foundation, and the disease, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and of leather, because it has to milk well; and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs so easily rip open, for they draw blood from the entire body, and resemble ancient pains of the legs, and of the hip, and of the knee; and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about premature death in many dispositions.
Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
"And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to hurt .ij. times: the first time for subtlety in making the deep vein route."
"And if the skin is very thick, then it is necessary to hurt the third time; and when we want to milk the blood little by little, then we should hurt only once."
"And if we want to extract blood, then we should do it often; and if the skin is thick, then we should finish it completely, and the end should be that the vein bursts suddenly,"
and to those who have thick leather and hard skin, that you ooze the openings of the suction cups with oil that opens and dissolves. if it is in this state, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed oil of the cucumber;
and if it is in veal, with nettle oil, or with lily oil, or with chamomile oil, or other kind of oil.
And if it is very cold and thick, take almond oil, or balsamite oil, or aniseed oil, and other oils.
And if one has a painful swelling and large pores, then it is not necessary to put oil on.
but it should be washed after the wind has passed, whether it is warm or cold water, or water from a mulberry, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or similar.
And if one has moisture, if it rises thus, or water from myrrh, and sumac, and similar things.
And if one has large superfluities, they rise from old wine, or water from thistle, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things;
and is not well to use a suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or.ij. and do not sleep after the suctions,
and it is necessary that he be washed when he needs to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And guard against those who are prone to anger, and whose blood is too hot and fiery; if he eats cold things, such as grapes, endive, lettuce, and asparagus, and milk, and similar foods;
and let there be small fish, and a cage, and wet meat.
And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and let there be small fish and birds and pigeons;
and on the day that it rains, so as to drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some people no more wine or musk before or after the wind, in order to strengthen the main members; and be subtle with the salt, but it only works if you are warm.
The leeches that are used to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the stomach, and the podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks and the rain and the thigh, because this member does not feel pain when it is bitten.
and one does not do so except to attract blood from member to member, as we do with the breasts when the milk comes out; by removing the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the member.
and bone the pain, when there is operation or stone, if bone by its attractive power accidently the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
and so do this when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is wind held back,
and these suction cups are empty prepared to suck so little; and never are they prepared together fire, and no time the water of the well,
as such as diseases of the lungs, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or water in which it has cooked herbs suitable for this.
The form of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
And it should be 3 inches long and half a palm in diameter, and it should have a small hole at the center, about the size of an awl.
and be made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when applied to the limb;
and have a brass or iron crossbar in the middle for a handle;
and long and short ones according to the disease and the age of those who take them;
For the suction cups of children are different from old people, and thin people from fat people.
And it is necessary to put this suction cup on the limb:
take the candle of wax or .i. smoothly, and put it in the middle of the suction cup at the root of the limb which is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your two hands are on the hole that we have said, so that when you put it on, if there is steam, and then remove the suction cup;
and take the lining as before, and renew it often, if you need to do so.
In the suction cup that is used for pleurisy, there is no verge or hole, and it is only useful when it is plain of water, and is placed on the limb only a little.
and this is the form:
And it is not possible to apply suction cups except in limbs where there are small spaces, such as the lips and gums, and similar places. and in the skin of the chest, if it is thin like two fingers or a nose, and other similar things;
and the quality of using them is that when you find suction cups that are in clear fresh water, take them;
and put them in honey, until they are family, and have nothing in their bellies; and then heal the wound and the abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are healed and have grown, and where you can put a poultice, you put it on, for that is good afterwards.
If not, raise the leg thus, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if it is too warm after the body of the snake, then a linen towel in cold water, and put on it, as long as the snake is stiffened;
and if there are many snakes, then put on it crushed vitriol or garlic and similar things, as long as they are stiffened;
or you put on the ground half of peeled peas, and let them burn at the fire, now they will be stiffened;
and if you have more work to do, then take other snakes.
And if the blood will not take up, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you put in an needle as long as it shoots out blood. and then lay them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they die;
and when you see that they are crying, then sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and marjoram, or ash, so they will cry now.
Here begins the book of fractures
The chapter of this book is necessary many times in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of breakages and dislocations.
Know, you who read this, that the wise men have never poured this paste, and neither have they ever read about it in any of their old books or letters.
and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good one before;
and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the preceding twenty chapters.
It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and delay on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture, dislocation, twist, or strain comes to anyone, it is appropriate that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing else can save him, so as not to be weak of heart, or infirm, or old;
or if his temperature is not very high or too low; and do not drink too much water, nor eat too much food, and do not fill the member with matter that causes blood loss, until you have no doubt about the apogee of fire, nor about the expansion of material in the member; but return the sick person to his usual government which he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that grows fat quickly, or has viscosity like cooked wheat, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from dairy cheese, and poultry, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a quick healing, the nutrition must be increased, and the break must heal faster.
And know that broken bones of the old and frail will not heal or harden according to their nature by the loss of members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but have no cure, bring together the broken ends of the bone. i. large bones that heal and join the member together as much as possible, so that it hardens as it was before; and do not stop at all from its work, and because it is necessary to feed on large meat, as we have said.
And know that the breakers are many and various ways.
For the break in the head is other than the break in the leg, or the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in the limb, as when one cuts with a knife, like the length of a feather for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in the limb, as when one cuts with a knife, like the length of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a small break at all.
And in each case there is an instrument, and its own special tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in place.
And the fracture of the bone is caused by what the angles are twisted and opened well from one another, and some to the presser of the hand;
And when there is no twisting or turning, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
But it can also be that there is twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture. If it is not necessary for you to move the shoulder by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then hold it now gently.
And know that the break that goes in the shoulder, and are the .ij. parts separated, it now comes to put them equally, so that the abscesses come quickly;
And if the abscesses come quickly, if you leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are calm; Then put it evenly on the medicine that you can apply lightly and safely, and know that the restoration of the shoulder is easier than the restoration of those where there are pieces; then hold it, as it comes later.
And if the bone is broken in pieces, and it extends by half parts, whether it be hand or foot, or a small member of the hand, or to two strings, or to a string and to your hand;
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are healed, you remove by all means the additions in their places at the same time as you can, and guard against your work causing injury or pain to the patient;
and set the two shoulder bones according to the best shapes.
And feel well to the hand if it seems not right: if it is set well, and does not strain too much, do not press it as those who make it come from their work do with the shoulder, by chaut and contraction of the member, as we have often wanted.
And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither while watching nor sleeping, turning himself around, or by any other means. and make sure that the limbs are so secure that they do not feel any pain. For when there is no pain, and it is set in place, and make sure to put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when there is no pain, and it is set in place, and make sure to put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and make sure that it is placed correctly, so that no awkwardness comes when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
I know that broken members are different in smallness and greatness and in shape.
For there are little members, such as breast and toes and similar things: it is necessary to wrap them in linen cloth soft and subtle;
and those that are fat, such as chest and leg: it is necessary to wrap them in a thick and sturdy linen cloth, for the thick linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it steady from all sides evenly, so that there is no itchiness;
Then he will bend the leg a little, .iij. times or iiij. times according to the limb, and with his hand will grasp the whole length, then he will go up over the break and will hold it less tightly, so that the break then moves a little away from the break;
and he will soften the ligament a little and a little, until you press on a great part of the healthy place, then take .i. other limb, and turn back very much over the broken place;
then go back to the part of the break, and hold it gently, not too strongly or too lightly, as we said in the first line above;
then put between the leg-strings of linen or drapes, until they are all even, then lay it down completely .i. bend, and then put your well-made braces on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or abscess, put something soothing on it, and let the abscess drain, and leave it like that for a few days;
Then extract it from your bones, and make a half-inch cut for bleeding, or use a saw made of wood, or palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the bone which one puts on the fracture is a little thicker and wider than the other bones;
and be also according to the size of the member, small or large;
Then tie it to the stakes also as you did at first, then tie it above on a string, like in the first place on the splinter.
Then tighten it again, less tight than before; and it is necessary that the string be thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
For if the string is thick, like those I have seen for the works of fools who make shoulder strings from linen threads, and that is a great mistake, because the shoulder cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should be less than two inches between each stake;
And if the patient is pricked by the hooks of the stakes after the string has been tight, then put wool or linen rags there so that he does not bleed.
When the wound is with the rupture, and the cure is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it does not correspond to extract all the members of the first day when they are broken. For when the members are large, it does not correspond to put splints before 2 or 3 days or according to the injury of the abscess; but
and here is the manner of the ancient splints to restore the rupture, dislocation and torsion: and it is that you take the flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and mix it with ample egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the splint restoring the rupture in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, for it is not too much chopped or twisted.
Another way of plastering to restore the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take Z abarays and ladany and enule and asefetida and arabic gum and muga, na 10Z; myrrh and aloe, na 5Z; alochil 70Z; and grind them into a powder, and mix them with baboon's blood of uff; if the complexion of the ome is warm, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Another way of plastering that is useful for torsion: take muga and viscose, na 10Z; myrrh and aloe, na 70Z; acacia vi Z.; bolic armenic 10Z, and grind them well, and confect with strong or baboon's blood, and administer.
Another way of plastering for joints and bones out of place, and to soothe pain suddenly, and to fit the bone: take a new one, and moisten it with warm water and oil, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore properly, but it is good for soothing hot pain in an abscess, and for properly fitting the bone.
Another way of plastering that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-olive leaves, and grind them together, and make an ointment.
Other way to embowel in the restoration of bone fracture and to soften the remaining of an abscess. Take root of marshmallow, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, from each one part; grind it, mix with wine, and the members are heated, mix it with water from coriander, or with water, and use it.
Another way to embowl more strongly than the first, when an abscess lasts until the restoration of the member. Take roots of marshmallow, flax seed, borage, melilot, and windflower, and chamomile, from each one part; grind it, and mix with water from salt, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras states that one should not put on the broken member for restoration more than a wax and oil cerot, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen states that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as mirr and aloe, and incense and similar things, such as we have said.
Other methods of plastering that are useful for lesions and pain: grind up the bones of small animals, or the feathers, and the veins, and tie them together evenly, then crush them, and make a plaster out of them, and lay it on the wound.
Then take off the plaster bit by bit, and see if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone moves out of place; if not, take off the plaster with your hands.
And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, or there is no rest or swelling; then quickly take off the plaster, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it in the water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of the warmth;
and rest the inflammation of the member, and be bone the pain, then recommence the place gently, and a little plaster, and do not strain it so hard as before; and gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need to use plaster and binding, then start again, as you did at first, with equal length.
And if there is no improvement in the member as we have said, do not remove the plaster until after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it on for more than twenty days; according to what you see, as long as the break-out comes closer to the shoulder joint.
Then keep it on longer than before, and let it thicken its flesh as I said above; and if you see that the moisture disappears faster than it should, know that there will be no improvement. Then remove it after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it on for more than twenty days; according to what you see, as long as the break-out comes closer to the shoulder joint. Let there be a warm water bath, every day, and this is for each part, and let there be salt in the water.
For in this work, let there be a hot water bath, and this is for each day, and add salt to the water; and let there be a careful examination of what is wrong with the limb, so that it is restored wrongly: it is evil, and if it is painful, and I see no other remedy than to ease and treat it properly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breaking, and there are different shapes and the causes are distinct.
For he has fractures that are made by the impact of an spear, and the collarbone breaks all the bone until syfac which is dislocated the bone, so as to do what one does or was; and for this reason this method of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the spear breaks the bone from above without piercing it, and is called in this language a "brisure absolue"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is impact from within, or a fracture, or a collarbone of stone, or a fall onto stone, or similar things.
And if there is a piercing fracture, which approaches but does not touch the tendon which is outside the bone, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that has healed in the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small split, so it is called this break "capillaries";
And if the wound is made by a stone or by falling or by some other thing, and it enters the bone as a piece of wood enters a cauldron when they pour it into the cauldron; if it goes into the stone.
And this happens more often in the lower part of the body, where the bones are softer, as in the case of a child's head.
And all these types of fractures, small pieces break like plates of metal, and I will speak about them in their place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and the investigation at tents, and the carriage corrupt that is upon it.
The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed up against, so that it opens up a black fracture.
In the treatment of the fracture, be careful as to what happens to the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of feeling, extension, clumsiness, fever, or hot sweat, and red or wrinkled skin, and other similar symptoms in multiple body parts, it is doubtful that they can be healed.
And if you do not see any likely accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the baby is born first to you, and it's in the winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month for you to do.
And if it's in the spring, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day of the month so that the tissue around the bone doesn't rot, and the accident that we have spoken of comes about.
And if the break in the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the skull, then you must split the split part thus: and it is that you press on the chief of the sick person, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more than you can.
and if the departure of blood comes with the uncovering of the bone, or abscess, then you must aid him who is in that need, and it is that you fill the place with damped linen wetted with oil. and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm, and be sure of the loss of blood; then begin to cut into the bone, and it is done according to .ij. ways of operation: one way is that you chop at the narrow end in front, and this is the form:
And then I make another cut wider than the first.
And the second way is that you make a number of different cuts, some wide and some narrow, pointed, and made of iron; and do it lightly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it inside, as well as you bring taillemens with tethers, not perfectly so that they pass beyond the bone, and should have above the point a margin or .i. circle, so that it does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tethers for all test; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of tethers:
Here is the translation of the text:
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it seems to you that you rest the sharpness which is kept by the bone from all .i. other instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be more soft and more fine than the other incision;
and if it does not keep anything from the small bones, nor scales, if the bone is lightly tied to any instrument; then heal the wound with tenses and oils that we have said.
And the other way to work if it is that of Galen who says, which is more effective; and press it very hard, and this is his word: It is first necessary that you should uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture has opened up, so that when you have uncovered this part, you shall place the end of this lenticular chisel upon it, from which comes this shape:
And do not cut from one side, and the section is wet in two. 2. sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then take a small mallet on top, so that you knock lightly on the bone all around, and be well aware of the tendon that is attached to it;
if it is fixed to the bone, so knock lightly on the bone, because when the bone is well fixed, there is no pain, and there is no fear.
And if the bone break does not pierce the skin, and cut the bone only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then cover this roughness with a fine razor that you must have in various quantities, to apply according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you are facing great razors, and after smaller ones, do not cease to do this as long as it is necessary.
In each of the other haircuts and delicate shaves, you must adapt according to their shape; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered by those who have put their study in this art.
And if the wound is infected, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound; and you must put a poultice on top of it. then take another doubled cloth, or two or three, and dip it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and make it lighter than you can, so that you do not harm the wound, then apply it above the other linen, and do not strip it off except to moisten the wound only;
and leave it so .i. jor or 13., until the abscesses are calm, then take off, and administer drugs like roots of licorice, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer sometimes drugs that do not cause itching;
and guard that the wound be clean, so you do not leave it alone or allow it to gather bowels, for when bowels gather over the brain's membrane, if they corrode and burn, they bring great harm to the patient; because when one puts a mordant drug on, if it does not dry out above it.
Therefore, be careful, for any bad accident may happen to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blacken does not come because of the medicine that has been put on, which has its virtue, then you must squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and one drape of resin, and put it on the wound. and then the cure in a way that he understands, as long as he is healthy.
You know that never are broken the .ij. parts of the neck from above, or one by one for he has 12 bones; and those of the back are cartilaginous, and do not break if they are bent or twisted, but heal.
And if one of the 12 parts is broken, then you must drive your little finger or thumb from the back of the neck and set it equal to its natural position by turning it in at the index finger and out at the thumb until the neck revives according to its natural form. and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain in your work.
And if his fracture is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, know that you put it equal to the head of a stick a little thick.
And if his fracture is in two parts, then do not restore it another way, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess at the base has calmed down, then bandage it with linen cloth at the neck, if his fracture is in one part.
Or you bandage the other side from the first, if his fracture is there; and let the wraps be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
And they say that there is no restoration unless the tents are made wet with ash and powder of mill; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And never bottle the water of the pen of an owl in place of the tents, and if it is so hot that it dries up and cracks the skin, and blows on the patient, or does whatever you see fit to do.
And if the abscesses open up while you are operating, put cotton wicks wet with rose oil or a little drop of dioxylon.
And if the abscesses open up, put an ointment made from wheat flour, and incense powder, infused with ash of owl, then apply it to light dressings, and do not tie the wound shut.
and if the break is small, it is broken into small pieces, so that when it is extracted with suitable instruments, then cut off the end, and cure the things that are attached to it, and bind it together, as you do with plasters and ointments that suit it.
and if there is no pain inside the neck, then cure the wound, and put on bandages of wool, until it is healed.
of the break in the jaw
When the jaw is broken and there is no pain, and the break is not very big, and it does not hurt much, except that it may be a little bit dislocated, if you can see lightly.
Il covient, si li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you stick your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jaw, stick your index finger from the right hand into it, and push the break inside gently, and make the same motion with the other hand away from it, and make it equal. And if the break of the jaw has been done in .ij., it is necessary that you regulate extension by .ij. parts, as long as it remains equal.
And if the movement of the teeth has occurred, or the rupture, if they are drawn out with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place on the broken jaw a waxed thread, and on top of it a double fabric; and place on top of that a large well-made platelet, or a piece of leather that is equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it to the muzzles that you have, and order the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the appearance has changed, if you leave it for three days, and then reset what has changed; and apply plaster to it, with flour from the mill mixed with ash or wheat flour from the husk, after you have taken off the wax; and apply a light layer of plaster, and if the plaster applies itself, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave him healthy for as long as he remains so; often he gets well in three weeks.
And if abscesses develop, administer as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, let no piece of the bone be osteted; if subtle, use the instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is tight, then widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have osteted all these pieces, and if there is no delay, so that the wound is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent injury, as long as it is healthy.
Here is the first sentence of the text translated from Old French to English: Here is the translated text line-by-line:
1. The fire cautery breaks several times in front, before the shoulder, and so it is broken and dislocated in two ways: either it is broken and dislocated at one end, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
1. And if you have to extend more, so put a round staff of cloth or other material over the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and stretch the fire cautery, and hold the staff with your hand, so that you make equal the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from the opposite side, so that it comes out completely, then the patient should lie down on his back and put his ear on the ground, and let the minister lift up the shoulder blade, until the bone of the shoulder comes up.
And then put the break between your two sides, and if you find that it is broken, then you must split it; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take off the instrument of the shoulder, in order to save the life of the patient:
and it should be like a spoon, and not a chisel, and be as wide as the bone requires and the work permits; and there are 16 chisels, if you see what I mean, and one is wide, and the others are narrow, just as the break in the bone that you made when you split the bones.
and when you are sure that the wound is hot, and if the break is small, or if you doubt about it, then employ linen and tents, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come up, so moist him with oil of roses and with wine and put on it.
The extraction of bone, when there are wounds and bruises, is that you put on the bone with the plaster of the mill and with the ash of the oven, and put light staples on it, and put a spike through it if you need to do so. Then take a very long band of one palm wide, then put two drapels on it, then plaster it; then take a thin stick of two fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the band, so that the top of the band is hanging; and put the stake on the broken part, and turn the band over your neck, and fasten the stake on the shoulder blade; and take back each part, and when you see that the time is right, and you clearly see that the stake does not move from above the bone, then release it every day, and when it slackens, if it tightens;
and let the patient lie on his back, and bind him with a small sling from the shoulder, to raise the dislocation up; so that the dislocation of the shoulder is eased by the tightening of the sling, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not loosen it until the accident has been cured for 20 days.
and then recommence the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place, and leave it so until it has healed; and it heals in 26 days, and less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
For the dislocation of the shoulder: Place the patient on their back, and bind them with a large bandage; make sure that the bandage is tight around the shoulder, and do not loosen it until the injury has healed; then apply powder from the mill with an abundance of egg white, and dust lightly, and place on a double cloth; then place on top a broad and thin board, one width wider than the shoulder, and remove the board's hair in any place where it touches the shoulder, except for the hair that is on the skin, so that the board sits evenly; and then hold it firmly in place, so that the board does not move from its position, and check it every day; and whenever it moves a little, hold it again, and make sure that the board is even if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his back; and the shoulder will be healed after 20 days or 19.
And if a piece of the bone projects forward and there is no space to move it back, then cut into it, and make as we said in breaking up the shoulder blade to calm down an abscess, warm.
of the break of the piece
of the piece is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks on its own; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the side, and causes great pain to the patient, and lack of aliveness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the vessels in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
and the restoration is that if the patient lies down on his back, and you put .i. cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the .ij. ribs with your hands, and gently make it equal in all ways as much as possible so that the appearance of the bone is like; then wrap it in .i. blanket, and cover it with a thin fabric of salt, or another light thing, and lie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the ligament to its place, and tie it tightly hour by hour, and if it relaxes, release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in the manner of cures; then remove the covering, and tie it again as long as it is healthy.
of the breaking of ribs
I know that the rib-break does not occur except in large ribs behind the back, and at the top inside, and do not ache much unless they are thin; and the sense is good to inquiry.
And restore them so that you make the break even, if it is necessary. And then put plaster on it, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do so.
And if the rib-break is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and aching, as if it were weeping; for the bone rubs against the membrane; and it makes him weak, and he has a great loss of appetite, and this is a sign of bad health, and the old ones have put great effort into it.
And if one of those who serve says that it is necessary to administer meat which swells the belly, to throw the breath away.
We do not do this, because when an abscess is hot, it will come if it has not already come. And if it has come, then let the patient lie down.
And none of us say that we put vinegar on the head, to draw out the wind, and this is right; however, doubt I that the vinegar will attract the excesses to the head because of the weakness of the disposition.
And said no one of them that the place of another should be covered with oil hot, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the space in front, then it is cured of the plague cure, of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that pokes through the towel, and doubt comes to the patient, then it is necessary to split on top of his place on the rib that is broken, and put there a special instrument to stop the bleeding; and then it must be sawed, and pulled lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if abscesses come up, then place towels wet with rose oil on top of them; and put on his place. And cure while his place is infected, and let him rest on his rib where it hurts, until he is well.
of the rib fracture at the throat
No one comes to break the bones of the neck, and there is pain; and also in the back. And when it has happened to anyone, and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his hands soften and swell and die, and cannot move them or stretch them out, and when you poke them with an needle, if there is no smell of it. Know that he is mortal in many states, and if they are still and smell well when they are extracted and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the sick person is cured, if one puts cure on it.
And if similar things come to the back of the neck, and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his neck soften, and the accident that is in his hands, and on the back there is windiness and excretion without willing; and when it is sovered on its belly, if there is no excretion without willing. And when it is sovered on its back and it tries to stand up, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not work in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then that is the lightest thing.
And the cure is that you reward if he has an abscess, put oil of rose or oil of moly on it, as long as it is calmed down; then put it on a padding of comfort and drying, and tie it with a rope, and command to the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if some bone is dislocated, then cover it with the curative poultice; and set the bone, then join the two lips of the wound together, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with poultices until it has healed; and if the bone has been broken, which is called the "bone of the knee," then take your handkerchief from your left hand, and place it flat against the other hand at your side, then apply the plaster and cover it with the cloth, if you need to; then bind it on, and if any bone has come loose, then push it back into place, and cure the wound until it is well.
of the break in the leg of the hip
There is a possibility that the leg hip bone may be broken, and if so, it is only a slight break at the head; and it will cause pain and swelling in the affected area, but not as much as a complete break would cause.
And the setting in place is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what the break is and what form it has; and if the break is at the head, then make it even, as long as it is in its natural form.
And if it is broken long way, or she declines inwards, so make the disease go up on his belly, until the restoration of that break is arranged for you. And when you have made it even, if you put the plaster on, then put on a beam of wood or of timber, and draw out the break, so that it does not move; and fill in the space between the ribs, until the place is even.
And command the disease to sleep on his side or back.
And if the abscesses come out, if they do not hurt, until the abscesses are even, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold them back as it should be, unless there is a bad accident; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
the dislocation of the shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the following two ways: in the first way you take a strong rope, according to this form:
And the two shoulders are tied together with two ropes, and they are lifted up, and cut the patient on one side; then put the shoulder into a sack of rope, and then lift it over something heavy or a weight; then make the dislocated joint equal to his hands together, until the dislocated joint returns as it should.
In the other way is that one should sit the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his collar, then command two ministers that one who is on the dislocated shoulder's side should hold it at its sides, and the others should stretch each of them to their parts.
Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, on lui retire les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Et si tu vois que l'extraction soit plus forte, si on tire.i. le lien des os la brisure, et sur la brisure, et on étend chaque ministre à sa part. Et si la brisure est proche du chef de l'épaule, il convient que tu mettes.i. le lien moien des os l'assèle, et.i. autre vers le coute, desoz la brisure; et aussi si la brisure est devers le coute, il convient mettre.i. le lien légèrement, sans travail, tant que la brisure soit égale sur le coute; puis on met égale la brisure, si comme il convient, et on la tire, si les apôtres chaus n'y viennent.
Et si tu doute que l'os ne se déplace pas, utilise des étais, et place sur la brisure une estelle plus large et plus forte que les autres, et espace chaque estelle de deux espaces, et rende chaque estelle aussi grande qu'elle dépasse la brisure de deux espaces de chaque côté; puis entraîne sur les étais, ainsi comme je l'ai dit au début du chapitre sur le chapistre sur la brisure, plus fort et moins en éloignant.
And if you see the seat of the stars, and the extraction, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incisions warm, leave it tied until the seventh day, as we said; then examine each .ii. days the thread, so that itching does not spread or come to place, or the new growth cannot come to the member because it is too strained. If it is ordered, as we said.
And if such an accident does not come, if he does not free it until after three days or more, and the patient lies on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and sets out the shoulder with a plain cloth of even wool, and examines each hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ligature; if it responds to the power of medicine, and gives him meat as we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle level; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be freed after ten months; and then he must free it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to apply to the joint. And if the stiffness is ugly and hard, let him wait to free it for one day or more.
of the break in the arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "fociles," one of which is small, and this one extends the fist; and the other is large, and it is that which extends beyond the little one on the side; perhaps the large focile breaks by itself, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
When the small focile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is ill, and it hurts more than when they are broken together. If only the small focile is broken, then the proper thing is to extend it lightly, and make it even.
And if it is the large focile, then you should strain it more strongly; and extend it on .i. side, and turn the fist of the hand above all the other bones, and the small fingers below all the others, and make the patient cross his arms over himself, and a minister extends one arm to the dislocated part at his side, or at his hip, and another minister at the top; and then he makes him even according to his best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, then each one should be put in its place, and if any of them are loose, then you should hold them with your hand, and you cannot restore it to its place, then you must bend it and the bone. As we have said before.
And if with the cauterization there is an ulcer, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; so take care.
And if in the treatment of ulcers there is an ulcer, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; so take care. And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, so it is necessary that you soak the member in warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the member rest without straining it. And then begin again with the cauterization, and if the lacing is soft and the bone has been dislocated, and similar things, then treat it.
And if the member is too strained, so that it cannot be relaxed, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for some days, until the tension is relieved, and then apply the cauterization.
Et s’il ne vient aucun de ces choses que nous avons dit à malade, si non le délier jusques à .XX. jours; ou enquintrant, puis li pent les mains à son cou, et soit ses cols égaux, et se garde de mouvement et de déguisement, et dort sur son dos; et saisisses que ceste briseure est rétablie en .XXX. jours ou en .XXXv., et par aventure en .XX. jours, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, unless you release him after 20 days; or when he is in a fit state, then he will hold his hands at his neck, and make his shoulders equal, and keep them from movement and deformity, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 60 days or 65, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Know that at the back of the hand and on both hands there are few fractures, and only a little pain comes;
And when the plant of the hand is broken or painful, let the patient sit straight and upright with his hands in front of him, equal; then put your hand on an extended cloth, and extend the members of the broken bones, and put them together evenly; and apply plaster and stabs, except for the knuckles, then wrap it in 1.5 yards of linen.
And if it breaks in the garden behind the plant, then make a rod of drapelz, and instruct the patient that he should pull it out at its root; and then extract it with a long drapeil, and make it straight as the plant from his hand, and extract it, as it comes.
And if it breaks at the back, then you should put a stake in, and another above the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and sewed the ligature between the two hands.
And if it breaks at one of the two hands, then you should make it even, as it comes; and extract it with the plant, and if you see that it does not move, then raise a small straight stake to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is at one of the other two, then make them even, and bind them together, holding them tightly, so they don’t move, or you will strain them, as I have said.
Of the broken shoulder
The bones of the hip are often broken, and we can see it clearly when it turns forward and backward; and the repair is done by bonding above and below the break. The patient lies on his face, then extends each minister [helper] to his side evenly; and it is when the break is made in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hip, then one of the lines goes towards the knuckle of the hand, and the other goes behind the break; and if it is near the knee, then one line goes down the thigh, and the other up towards the break; and then he places the bone even with his two hands according to its natural form, and then he applies the plaster, and ties it up, so that the blood does not flow.
And if there is an abscess, let it be left to rest and then return to your work and your treatment; the time has been well spent. It is necessary that you wrap around the break. i.e. bandage hard double in .ij. or .iij., and wait for the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and pour. i.e. thread long between the thigh and the leg, release the knee cap, and bring the chief with the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break staves, and put a staff on the bone of the leg; then employ the place out between the leg and the thigh of drapes soft to put equal the stretching, then begin to tie in form. iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and as you go more up on the break, and less the stretch; then enter in .ij. threads that you have poured between the leg and the thigh, and lie .iij. staves that are above, then go back to the release at the chief of the thread, until you come away from the foot; and the stretching, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if it comes ne abortion or swelling or other appearance.
And if it happens, if it releases, and addresses that which comes to it, if like we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold, if it is necessary to take them out, if one can; and if one cannot, if it is necessary to split the place, and to draw forcibly; and cure it as we have said, until he is healthy.
And never is broken the thigh in this way that one sets staves, if like in the aid and where arm; however, in this restoration made does not sound the patient.
And know that the wound heals in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the knee joint
For in the knee joint there is sometimes a little fracture, but it often heals several times. And if it fractures, let it be only a crack or a hole, and not a whole break, because otherwise it hurts a lot.
And let the restoration be such that what is broken on one side is made equal to it on the other, as much as possible; then put plaster, and put a round stake, if you need it, and fasten it so that it is secure, then give treatment to all injuries as we have said for other fractures, like an ape and others. Put what is right for each accident, until he is healed.
of the break of the leg
That the leg has .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are like those of the arm equally, and the work is done in the same way as that of the arm equally, and the dislocations are done likewise.
And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns round on all sides.
And if the thin bones are broken, so the leg turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then you feel great pain and see it clearly; and then turn back to extension. Then extend, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break be ugly, and there are many pieces, so the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
And when you have finished your work, then take 13. faixes of rope that purple the leg on one side and another, and are long from the knee to the hip until the heel; then wrap them in 13. leus 1. bendeil from above and below, and tie them in the middle, and at this tying no leg shall decline towards the right or left, and so is good; and none administer 1. bers of rope long from the leg, and if it is of rope, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly do one on the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; and heal it as long as it is healthy.
of the bone break of the foot
At the ankle there is no bone break, but the bones of the foot come in various breaks and positions, and there comes only one break from fire.
And if it happens that the bones of your foot are broken and you see those bones overtake each other, then place this person down on the ground like they want to walk, and then now put your foot on their own, where the bones have risen up again, press it with all your strength until it comes back to its own place; then put the paste on and stamp it, and put a little plate in the navel of the foot that has 1.5 square inches of plain cloth, then hold it forward, and when you have wrapped the drapes and other things you need around them.
After three or four days have passed, because you will find the bones even if they are broken or dislocated.
And if there is one of the two broken, then restore it, as we have said for the hand; and put a stake according to its length on the broken side, and let it be a little wider, then put the little plate on that I spoke of next to the foot, and press it forward; and if there are 1.5 or more, or more, broken ones, then put a stake according to their quantity, wrapped in 1.5 drapes of linen, and press the plate against the navel of the foot; and may it be well under the chief of the plate the belly of the foot is.
And remember not to forget any other things that I have said for the others that break, when we have said it; and assist each injury in any way possible.
of the fracture of the arm bone with the knuckle joint
When the arm bone is fractured with the knuckle joint, if the fair lady is seated upright, then she should be inclined to the back part of the body, and supported from behind; then stuff the socket with cotton, and put in as much as a fist; then let the lady stand up, and touch her back slowly, and then take out the cotton, until it comes into the socket, and set the bone with the fist; and when she urines, if she holds the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it, and so do this. 20 days or more: thus will the fracture be healed, and the lady will be cured, take a bladder of wild boar, and tie a cord to the navel, and pour all the bladder into the socket; then blow into the cord forming a shape, until the bladder is inside: so the socket will come back to life; then stuff it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until it has healed.
And when the arm bone of the man or woman is fractured, if it is restored as we have said in the book on the femur; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and effort into them, and hear my book. For the fracture symbolizes many things in the right way to restoration: listen to it then.
In the vagina, when it is fractured, take a bladder of goose and pour into the vagina; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for .iij. days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
of rupture with wound
It is appropriate for him who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or limb, to be healed now, so that the healings which we have said witness.
And if the wound heals, unless there is a vitriol stain, then you have nothing else, then start to restore the rupture in that very hour, or that day, so that the abscesses do not come.
And if the abscesses come, unless you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm and you do not touch them nor on the third nor on the fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek, so that you put it with a light hand to your cheeks with small extensions.
And if the extensions do not fit your hands to make them equal in length, then take this iron instrument which is 5.6 inches long, and its width is according to the amount of the wound; and for this one is skilled at the miring so that he employs 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each cure of a break; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when you open it, and be sharp in front and thick in the middle towards the front:
And it is called "palainche", because the bent shoulder should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it is struck once, as long as it revives, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone until the instrument can take it properly.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then with an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, in your power; then remove what is left of the bone in small pieces.
And when the jaw is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position. If it is in its natural position, then wet it with wine-styptic black, and clean it properly; and do not place wax or anything else on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption to come forth; then administer poultices when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the quantity of the wound, and be well aware that the wound should not be constricted with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick person, or dead or corroding none of them ever; and the extractions are more soft and less sore than those of the other fractures.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come forth, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not appropriate to place poultices on; but wrap it in place of poultices with hard cloths, and bind them. And when you see after one day or two days that a bow has formed at the wound's edge, then take off what you have placed on it with vinegar, and apply healing ointments, as with four-part herbal ointment and others.
And it is necessary that you loosen and re-bind the member three times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can run down leichtly.
And if someone runs through, and he cannot hold it but returns to its place, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so you must cut the wound with a knife, and remove all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bone of the chest or shoulder, and other large limbs, do not pull it out, because many times death comes; but leave it to putrefy; perhaps later. After 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
Of bruses that come from the sudor
We come many times after the health of the broken one, most especially when it is near the joint, and this is an ugly thing to see in the form of the limb; and by chance cannot make the limbs do their natural work.
Take care therefore that we are fresh: if you administer stinging medicines, as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocollous substances, such as acacia, and others like them; or do not use any of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine of the stings, or with a lot of honey or oil; and put them on the lump in piles, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days; and then unbind it, and start again, until the nodules are hard; or you hold it to a piece of glass carefully made; because the property of glass is that it hardens all the swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule has become hardened like stone, it needs to be opened, so that the surplus appears, or you cut it off with a razor, until it is healed.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limbs are weak and slender from a variety of causes: either because it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because it had too many ligatures, and could not receive the blood supply to the member; or because of a great amount of inflammation; or because of too much movement at the wrong time; or because it had little blood in its body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the torso flexible, until the number of sores increases in it; and give him baths, and provide him with pleasure and rest; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great thirst, and pour on it often with fresh water, until the thirst runs into the member; and return to its natural shape.
the dislocated limb after the cure
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that you must break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and great harm comes to them, and perhaps they die; however, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is good that they be soaked in hot water, or with soft herbs that are cooked, such as vismavine leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the fetid substance made therefrom, so as to make an ointment that softens, such as the one made of myrrh well done, and you take the muscovy oil of vismavine, and confound it with lard or oil of seed-cake, and make an ointment thereof; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of kolin, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And no bone is kneaded by hand to rub continuously and repeatedly; and make movement of the member every hour.
And if it is twisted and hardened, as it often is in stones, then it must be cut with a small, light knife, and put resin and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back into place, without any delay.
For if one delays, and the veins swell up, and by chance one sets them back to their place; for that it is not good to move them when they are swollen: many times causes spasms and other pains;
However, when it comes, treat the disease, and then leave it, until the abscess is calm; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the injury heals in its place.
And I have ordered the potions for dislocations of the shoulders until the joint is pierced.
the jaws
Now let the jaws be dislocated from above, and the dislocations of both are according to 19 ways: or they are a little out of their places, and soften a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the loins, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with speech.
When the dislocations are small, return them by means of these eight dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers rub the head of the sick person, and pour a little oil from one of his hands on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, then the dislocation is of 19 parts; and the other two hands should be apart, so that they can move it all around. And command to the sick person that he softens his jaws, and moves them all around.
And he makes the wound even, as it comes to its place.
And bring it back with a gentle hand, especially if the two mandibles are together, so that you heat it slightly with hot water and oil, gently bringing it back; do not tarry in bringing it back, as we have said.
And when they have been brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a softener, put it on a drape wet with a paste made of oil and wax, then lightly touch it with molasses while it is still warm;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his cheeks between 15 inches (the width of the hand), so that he does not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to improve his position, but eat light food, as long as the pains are relieved, and the mandibles are no longer sore;
and then if it seems light, and do not work to open the mouth for chewing and drinking, as long as the jaw is well tied and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their places in an hour, and are not returned to their places, then there come fevers and normal colds, and by chance intestinal solutions, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid only.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a death sentence; and many times dies he who has it, in seventeen days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from the coast down to the extension of the body, and is dislocated several times at the back, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will return; and then put on the plaster and bandage, and tighten it;
and the head which is on the coast cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all times, let him return to his place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient that he rest until he is healed;
and also here is how to reset the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
That the shoulder is dislocated only because of these two ways: that one is dislocated to the part of the socket; and the second is to the part of the bone; and by chance it is dislocated to the upper part, and this happens little.
and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nubs; and many times dislocates out of the socket towards the assembly, however much this hurts him, because at this he will go to hospital; those who have enough money, they hurt themselves, and return hurt.
And by chance there are some people who break or damage, and heat the shoulder with a hot apoplexy, and think that it is dislocated because of this.
It is then necessary for you to test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And is recognized the dislocations when it is swallowed toward the shoulder, and makes a difference between the ill and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and dislocates the shoulder to the chest, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its side, nor make any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it may be hidden, for you will find it clearly at the chest;
and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient has become ill.
And the method is that the minister takes the patient's hand up, then places the splint on the armature, and pushes the joint upwards to its place; and the minister takes the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it down; immediately there will be a great deal of movement.
And if it does not come as we have said with the hands two days later, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister should give a softening and soothing infusion, as of alfalfa and fenugrec and melilot in water, and be given;
and then he should lie down on his back, and place a wooden splint on the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then put the minister's heel on the splint, and pull the patient's hand up;
and other ministers wash out the head of the disease so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns right now, and see how you will remove it according to this way:
and so that you make him present .i. a person who is greater than the disease; and let it be right next to the coast, and press down this shoulder from the back of the disease, and lift up the shoulder upwards so that the disease hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the disease downward toward the belly. And if the disease is too light, then put something heavy on it, and let the dislocation return now.
And the ramie is also done in another way: and it is fixed  .i. a long piece of wood on the ground, whose length is like a pistol, and is not too thick or too thin; Then let the patient lie down, but with a sheet over him, and the patient be standing up longwise; then let his hand be extended below another one forming a bridge, and the joint will return to its place securely.
and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take .i. twig of an arm of great and iii. fingers wide, which has the head turning for muscled bones to enter perfectly dislocated the assele, according to this form:
Then let the head be placed on a sheet, so that it does not hurt the patient, then let it be dislocated the assele of the patient; and extend your arms above the head, and place the shoulder on the arm, and the hand at the head, then place the arm on a block of wood of a certain size, and let it hang by one side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, then you must put a ball of wool the same size under the assele; then set the plate of powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris, on all the shoulder and around, then draw it out under the assele coming, and tie it to the plate, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
And it is necessary that he suck a little while the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then suck after .viij. days or thereabouts, and move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint has moved from its place due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, you must apply the cauterization to three parts, as we have described it before or with the paste of the cauterizations.
And if you have done all this, and after .vij. days it slides away, and the joint cannot hold up the arm in its place, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has not returned to its place.
The dislocation that is to the right of the loins, and the mammary glands, or behind, is made by an impact, and the extension of the hands, and I administer another place; and treat as long as it is healed.
And if after healing comes greasiness to the limb, and late movement, then the patient uses oil many times until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation from the joint
Says that the joint dislocation has been displaced to the extremities, and returns to its extremities; and if it is displaced from all sides, most notably in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for we can clearly see and feel it; and let it be displaced according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder.
And it is necessary that you bring it back in this way as the leg is healed, for if the leg was healed, it would be a grief to bring it back; and by chance cannot be brought back from all and everywhere, most especially when it is at the rear; so much worse than the other dislocations, and is of great pain, and perhaps comes death.
And the restoration is thus, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands between the thumb and the finger, from behind and from before, and put the joint back into its wrist together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, bring it back when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and lift up the root of the palm with the thumb which is behind.
And if it does not return to its place, bring it back with strong extension; and there are two who extend the arm, and they hold the two ends of a long and wide cloth, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have enveloped a double-cloth long and wide.
and when he applies his hand to the joint, if he does not rub it with any oil for ease of movement, then tighten the joint properly until it regains its position;
and when it is in place, if applied with dry plaster and tightened properly, and the arm is held at the shoulder of the sick person, and left for a few days, then it is released.
And if the joint has set properly in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, then begin again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and massage it well, and press until it is relieved; or put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then wash and dry it out; and when he sweats, he gently rubs the joint, then puts the new one on, and then goes in or bath; and so does .ij. times or .iij., until it is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet loaf of bread that has been heated, and strain it up; and it will come back to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
the dislocation of the hand is loosened, and the recovery is lighter than that of other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, when it is loosed, so that the joint may be swollen or an abscess may form.
And the remapping is that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and look at it so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and squeezes it until it comes back to life.
All the same, you must make sure it is properly positioned; then place the patient's arm on a table with its hand extended and drawn back. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and examine the appearance of the joint; if it returns to its position now, it is good.
If not, then cut off a piece of flesh from the thumb, and leave it there as a reminder.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back to its position after several days, then let the joint twist.
and is of no use to the patient until his hands are wet, and cannot extract anything at all: so know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; otherwise there is another cause than that of extracting by means of a delicate fire, and possibly nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, put it on the plaster we have said, then extract and leave it there. v.jors, then unstick it and leave it like that.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if the moist heat of water, and rub until it is cured.
of the dislocation of the two hands.
None of these are dislocated at all to either side of the hand, none to the back of the palm or to the belly.
Then are they two, and press the dislocation towards your knuckles until it comes back, then hold the head of the two together, and push it towards the part where it is connected;
and then leave it.ij. days, and then make it even again that day; and if it is tight, let it move again, and then hold it in place; and do this often, until it has become loose, so that it does not move again; and then let it rest, and let it heal; and when it is healed,
and do the same thing if it is dislocated on the palm side of the hand, and do so as you have done before until it is healthy; and do the same thing if it is dislocated from the other side.
Do to dislocation of the shoulder bone at the arm,
When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, or multiple joints are out of place, without proper treatment, it leads to death quickly.
And the signs are that the excrements come out without control, they cannot be held back, and many times the limbs become weak, or the arms or legs.
And many times the neck becomes mute at three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilboize".
If it is due to a childhood malady, then there is a cure; if not, there will be no cure or recovery.
And those that come from falling down, or from blows, or from similar things, the old manner of curing them with great words has not been of much benefit.
but I have simplified it according to my intention, and have devised instruments in various ways.
I say that in the childhood malady that comes before, there is neither medicine nor cure;
and also say that it comes straight in .ij. sides, and can not be cured but properly who comes at the back, as I say;
is that the patient is laid down flat on his back in a long, even position, and has had an extraction of pus so that he does not get bruised;
then put 1. log of fire in the earth at the head, and 1. log by the side, and tie a string over the patient's body at the shoulders, and 1. log between the knees, and 1. log between the feet;
and the two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other by the side, among the 2 logs;
and are firmly closed, the thread as we have said, and the mirrour puts its palms on the spine, until he revives.
And if he does not recover with this treatment, take a large bowl of two arms long, and cut a hole in the wall, and place the patient on one side, and pour the contents of the bowl over the head, then put the middle of the bowl on the spine. and place the mirror's tips on the other side of the bowl, and press firmly until he revives; and if you see this, do it with a ring which turns the hand.
and put two fire-sticks on the patient's head with a long space between them; and place one hand over each stick, and wrap a palm of space around them.
and let each stick i .e. pine, or it turns over, and are the sticks firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each two sticks is one stick turning, for so the bond turns, and let 1 . j . small sticks of a palm long, to turn the bond;
and then the bond that is between the axles towards the top of the tree, and the other bond towards the pegs at the opposite end, and each of the ministers turns his bond on all the bonds, and the master puts the string even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on desicative plaster with a lot of incense, and then the staples, and then the stele of a tablet of 1. iij. feet long, that so he puts the length of the leg of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the bond of a bond, as we have said, and uses the patient subtle nourishment, until he is healthy;
and if anything comes at the end of health, so administer soft and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said above; and do not give a piece of silver,
and there is never a appearance in the back of the spine of the backbone, and take care that it is not dislocations; and this is the bone which opens, so that one should not have any presumption: by chance might come death.
of the hip joints
come only dislocations, and not at all as with the other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to.iiij. parties: inside and outside, and in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the legs of the sick man than those of the healthy one, and cannot double his knee on fire; and the limb is swollen with heat due to an abscess, because the head of the hip comes from there.
And the sign of that injury if it goes wrong, is that this accident is opposite to those before.
And the signs of that injury if it goes wrong, is that his leg is well in accordance with the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double himself because of the pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot walk forward, and holds back his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
And the signs of that injury if it goes wrong, is that he cannot extend his leg, double himself, and his leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place where the ribs are joined.
If the patient is older and has had previous dislocations, and it takes time to happen, there will be no cure; it is only necessary that he not be presumptuous.
And in those who have had a fresh dislocation, and there are four kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to put the joint back together, turn it in and out, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not come back into place in this way, take very strong assistance, and support the leg with two hands or a bandage tied to the knee joint; and place another minister's hand above it in a way that it presses its hands together, then tie a strong bandage over the shoulder; and another minister should hold his hair;
and extend upward and downward altogether, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains standing.
This manner of extension is common to all three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must cure the patient's appearance. When the dislocation is in the garden, you must lie on your side facing downward, then bring the bandage to the root of the crotch, and the loop that is away from the anus, then extend the bandage upward toward the anus, and upward toward the thigh;
then have other ministers hold his arms, and embrace the large loop of the crotch, and extend it toward the back form: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot fasten it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong cord beneath the .ij. heels, and above the .ij. knees, and so that the injured leg is longer than the other by .ij. two more.
Then hang him by the neck of a mast, and set him on the ground 2 arms' length away; then command 1 minister to embrace the neck of the chest, and let others hang with the patient, who embraces the chest firmly, for now the joints will return to their place without difficulty.
And when the dislocation has returned to its place, so lie the patient, as we have said in that which concerns giddiness, and tie 1 cord properly upon the injured leg, and also upon the foot.
Then put 2 torches at the head and another one between the feet of the patient; then set a torch between the cheeks of the patient; and set a wet flag around, that it does not burn the patient, then each minister extends to him, and the doctor sets the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on .ie. a table, and press it so as we have said in the gibosity, and place the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, extend the leg that is not well far from him, and according to what I have said; and place the doctor's hand on his pain to be under the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, extend the leg that is not well far from him, and according to what I have said; and place the doctor' hand on his pain to be under the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee. If the dislocation is in the back, do not extend the patient far, nor raise him on the ground; rather, he should be placed as if he were lying on his side, as we have said for the bed; and place li mires sous lou malaide and let it on his face, and the line extended as we have said above, and must all press upon the joint to the table;
and will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; so make sure the feet are fixed, and apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so that the foot does not move;
and rest for ii or iii days, then remove it, and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are even, stretch them out as before, and leave it. iij days; then remove it, and let him walk about loudly, until the members are comfortable.
of the dislocation due to age
The members are dislocated according to three ways: namely, inside and outside, behind; and not in front.
And the signs are these: instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not touch his knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the rehabilitation of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your knees.
then take his knee at your palms, and draw back between the two, then bend the .iij. knees from the knee joint; and other ministers extend his foot, until the member returns to its place, and the signs are that he touches his knee lightly with his leg.
and place the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the chest, and join them together firmly .iiij. days or iiij. days, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are supported.
And if the limbs are not in place, administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation at the heel
The heel is never dislocated, and is never fully displaced inward or outward.
And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and try first on the part where it has come out.
They bring him in if he is light, and they should gently stretch his legs to their hands when he is only slightly injured.
And when it has come out completely, if it is necessary that you make the patient lie down flat, and you tie him up tightly by the legs, over the ankle.
Then train your feet to your hands, and then to your opposite hand. Then stretch him out, and stretch his legs well;
and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, then begin again the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie the sheets around it, so that he does not hurt the patient;
then place the minister's hand on his hip, and another minister extend the foot to his hands or to 1.a. chain, so that he holds it by the collar of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the stake be next to the hip of the patient to hold it in place while it is being extended;
And then make the dislocated arm equal with his hands, and some other ministers dip the healthy leg in the dung, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
And when it is ready, so put the plaster on and press down, and form the strain, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons behind the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight;
then let it be .ij. days or .iij., and if the strain has loosened, then let it be left for one more day, and if it is still loose, go to see the patient every three days; and if he goes before that term, it is not yet safe that he does not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come out, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
the two
When the two are dislocated, if it is properly extended without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in the hip or leg, so it is necessary that you place the patient on their back or on a table all straight, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot in this form, until he comes back;
and when it is even, and there is nothing open, so set the foot of the leg on a table at 1.2 degrees, then remove it while forming, and leave it 1.2 days, then let it be; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
of wounds and dislocations together
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you have not used it long, and if you are not compassionate and patient and slow to anger, do not be arrogant:
and use at the beginning of things soothing an abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if I restore now the member to its place, so that the abscesses may come;
and when the member is in place, then administer soothing ointment to the abscess, and cure the wound, if necessary, with drying ointments;
and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the joints are displaced, do as we have said in simple illnesses;
and you keep from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of your arms and your body. Amen.
