O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely, "surgery."
And because the work of the hand is neglected in our region and considered foreign everywhere, the knowledge and skills have perished, and nothing remains except for brief descriptions found in books by the ancients that were handled by the hands. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are hidden and knowledge is distant.
I think it is necessary to vivify this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of veins, and their movement and rest, and their places of origin.
And because Hypocrites says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he lanced the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine sur la tete d’un home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et li veines fu si lances que li sangs s’en fu tout par; et le home fu mort en  .iiij. jors.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.Et vis un autre home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et fu traitz la piere; et li sangs fu tant par la veine que li home morrut al instanz.
And I saw another patient who was treated by a duke of our land, who had broken his leg, and with the break, had a wound; and the ignorant doctors pressed the break on the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any dressing on the wound, and left it with only a bandage; and they instructed him not to remove it. And he remained like that, with his leg, foot, and toe all swollen, until they were lost.
I was called to attend to him, and I hurried to go and release the leg; and when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire leg was lost.
And I saw another patient who had a wound that became infected, and then inflamed due to the maltreatment of his lord.
Because when a ulcer is free from melancholy humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And because of this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that manual work is divided into two parts: that is, there are actions where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Then take up your weapons in confidence, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world into the other one of glory.
Galiens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on yourself the care of a serious illness unless you are called upon by a foolish master."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is on fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and it covers the head to the feet. It also includes information on the instruments of cauteries, their preparation, and all that is necessary for the procedure.
The second chapter is on cutting and piercing, leeches, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar procedures. It also includes information on the instruments used in these procedures.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and扭伤s, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge and the secret responses; and the majority of the wise spoke about this, and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I desire brevity.
I say that cautery aids universally in every complexion where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
Those of hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people said that cautery is of great aid; and others said the contrary: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and those who said the contrary, that cautery helps greatly in hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complex nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet, do not worry about this except for those who have experienced it and know through long usage the treatment with cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their recoveries and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the myrrh was similar and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery combines heat and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Because fire is simple and does not harm any part other than the cooked member, and does no harm to any other part if one does not touch it.
Burning medicines pass from one member to another, and cause the sickness of a grievous cure in the member; and by chance they kill the patient.
Fire does not hurt because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been under the truth of things; and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose an auspicious moment.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness that arises from it is lessened by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, severe pain that cannot wait until a more convenient time.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish people do; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not true, for cauteries are not like medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is better than medicine for its swiftness and power, and for the virtue of its work and majesty.
And it is possible that the disease may come again according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its power; and there are gathered in it the excesses caused by the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true: they do not believe that cautery works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is effective. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is milder than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experienced and found in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, as they said.
However, when you heat the golden instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is heated in the fire; and so there are many disadvantages.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer si le conais par la color et si durent adont plus longuement, et s’il n’est pas trop chaud il ne fait mie porriture.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Here I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
of olive-oil cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors which flow from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for numerous ailments such as dreaming, toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases arising from coldness, like paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; and then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; after that, place the palm of your hand between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, there will be bleeding, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olive-stone', and this is how it is formed:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and move your hand up and down while pressing gently; then lift your hand gently and check the bone again to see if it is broken; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed; then take a little salt and put it in awe and soft cotton, and apply it to the spot, and let it stay for 3 days; then apply moistened cotton in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
And the ancients say that when a wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise using leeches.
And some say that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then what has been burned in the bone is healed over, and then it is cured.
And others say that one should hold the cautery above and press so hard that one lowers the bone as much as a thumb width, as the women put their thimbles in their fingers to let the humors issue out; then the wound must be left open for a long time; after that it must be cured and bound.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, so I work together salvation.
of the old pain in the head
When chronic pain affects the whole head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as purges for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they undergo the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it with the fire cautery we mentioned earlier for just a little while.
Afterward, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and do one cautery in the area called 'vasselz'; there is a place for placing leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is the method:
of the cautery for the head: When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies I have described under the division of diseases have been applied without success: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with hot water and fire.
The cautery of hot water: take a clove of garlic and remove the outer skin; then crush it into two pieces, and apply it to the affected area where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the garlic clove, leaving the wound open for two or three days. Then apply a bandage soaked in butter until healing occurs.
After the wound has healed, if you see any growths, use one of the burning remedies I have described in the twelfth chapter on burning remedies.
The fire cautery is performed as follows. Heat the cautery tool until it is hot enough that its shape is changed:
And it is called "cauterization" because the top is made in the form of a lid where there is .i. little curve, and in the middle has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not glow, which is hot, and abundant blood flows.
After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this vein with the cautery called "cultellare", on all its points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this vein which is not old.
of vein
When you cure veins as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you should heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign the painful area with a line of about half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and so that spasm does not come to illness, and be careful of the mandible so that it does not move when one chews, and let the nerves have no regard for the mute and that spasms do not come to illness, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is covered, as covering has great fear and especially for those who are unaware and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him all over the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
of ear pain due to coldness
When there is ear pain from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a "point", of which here is the form:
After point around the entire ear of the affected side, or around both if the pain is in both ears, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear after you have marked the area to be treated; and have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
of the mouth's torture
There is no cautery for the ulcers that come from flowing blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve-spasms.
When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from blood flowing from the head and purging, and from gargling, if it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery in the shape of a key, burning it halfway down the ear, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the head is burned.
And the shape of the key is as we have described before, but it should be a little more slender, and the knife a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, yet does not benefit, and the patient has fever, then make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 on the place which is called 'vassels', as we said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large pilules that cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and put on the occlusion of mustard which is written in the treatise on occlusions; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, make him 3 cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of 2 fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient can bear it, make 1 cautery in the middle; and if need be, 2 more on the 2 horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery which is called 'olive', as I said before.
of coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and of that which we have previously mentioned; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization within the head and upon each temple, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you have greater need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then make four cauterizations upon the spine of the back; and let it be until the heart's most heat is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery be that which is called "olive oil" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed of hairs and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; after that, the king the head in the middle, and do to him .a cautery according to what we have said before, and .a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the disease is in children, make a subtle cautery according to this method:
When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.Et se li malaides est en la teste, se li fai cauteres de bille de verre selonc la maniere que j’ai dit; et s’il ne peut endurer le cautere de feu, se li fai cautere froid com nos avons dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are declining into melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.Et s’il est li cors dou malaide sec, adonques li fai boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mondifiez et li corps aussi, selonc ce qu’il est dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
After releasing the head of the ill person, make a well-made linen bandage in the shape of a circle and place it around the head; have the patient cross their arms and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, using mutton fat from an old sheep; gently heat it to a temperature that the patient can bear; then remove the bandage from inside the head and let it cool; do this for the ill person once a week until they are healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small pricks all over with the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in mutton fat and honey on top.
of their eyes When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drinking things that cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After he commands the patient to turn his head and cauterize the scalp, and make 2 cauteries on both temples if both sides are affected, or one if only one side is; and cut all the veins and arteries under the heart, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and be wary of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop it with as much power as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization method; and sometimes cauteries or incisions are made under the two bones at the back.
where tears fall
When tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he should be cauterized as I have said earlier regarding the temples: 1 cautery in the scalp, 2 cauteries on both temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions under the two bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
where the body weeps within them
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and make him a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare." This is how you make it:
And if you see fit to do so, make two cauteries on the two warts as long as the warts are; and don't take your hand away until a third of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have described.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned backwards and prick the eye; and cauteries are made according to two methods: one is with fire, and the other is with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; then draw on paper over their eyes a figure that is like a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the sign in between the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and parsley juice over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
After cauterize on the figure you have drawn a little bit many times, so that the heat is burned in the place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs rise at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus. For three days, then moisten cotton with butter until the scald is healed; after cure with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs grow, and the paper softens, then restart the cautery in the same place, just as you did before; and if the hair is lost, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one part, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it under the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work in one, and if in both, then also; and moisten cotton with egg white under the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and press a little and release repeatedly whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it burns just like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your right hand. And when the bite is passed, lift up the part, and examine if you see the papery skin raised as it was by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equalized, and your eyes are focused; then put on wet cotton in tallow until the burn scar is healed, afterwards cure the place of ointment which is called 'diaphenis' and others, until it is healthy.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get in the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the place which is soft from the paper properly, just as you did before; afterwards cure it until it is healthy; and this is the form of the myrrh fuel:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for those who study this art.
on the treatment of fistulas with cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head steady between your hands so that he does not move or lower his head. Then moisten cotton with egg white or parsley juice and apply it to the fistula. Next, heat the cautery, which should be shaped like a tent, with one point at each end, although a flat cautery is also suitable for your purpose.
Then press on the fistula if it is open and clean it out, drying it thoroughly. If it is closed, open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery directly to the wound, holding your hand on the cautery near the area beneath the eye, taking care not to cause any damage. Apply the cautery to the fat around the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cauterization to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cauterization again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that, place moist cotton on it, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals; and if 40 days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king according to what he would do in his chamber.
And there is a way of cauterization for a fistula that some of the ancients said. Examine the fistula, and pierce the site; after that, insert into the slit a slender camahan, from which there is a form: and they make the amount of a 3-day-old clump; and hold your hand on the camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not leak into his eye; and one must place moist cotton in the patient's eye, soaked in olive oil or in awe: the lead will fill the fistula, and heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, that is good. If not, then one must administer a poultice to the nail, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.
of cracks in the lips Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And put it gently into the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat, or uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, and it causes swelling and pus, and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said for fistulas, and it does not heal: then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleansing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and from behind; and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed like this, that is good; and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, reheat the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are softened and restrained, and corrupted moisture is dried up.
of dental pain
When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is needed: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter: take butter from cow's milk and the tip in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and hold it on the painful tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and butter becoming cold, heat the iron again so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take an iron or bronze rod and make it as thick as the fire will not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, which will form the shape that follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this several times, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter before the cautery, and then rinse it out afterwards; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to cold moisture and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the shape that follows comes next, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from one end of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. Then treat the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moisture overwhelms the channels of the stomach and particularly when it comes from a cold complexion, the patient should first be purged with solutive medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, being careful not to go all the way to the throat and not to burn the heart but just a little. Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle' of which we have spoken earlier; and dress the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tongue When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the sternum in open wounds; and another cautery between the breasts, halfway between the nipples; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
And if you see fit, make cautery by pricking with the cautery called 'points', of which the form is given earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or as needed. After that, dress the wound as described before, and let there be three rains according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are more effective when you do them three times.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, soak the patient's back and side in warm water; then gently press the liver which is inside the breastbone with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, apply the cautery which has two fingers of lead in this place where there are .ij. nerves:
and cauterize the heart until it penetrates to the chest, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and this is why a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put crushed herbs on the cautery; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, afterwards make a cautery on the thickness of the cautery claw, or with many cauteries in points. For the joint is closed and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
from the cautery of phlegm
The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegm with roots of aristolochia, and in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, and heat it on fire, and cauterize with 1 cautery between the throat and the collarbone, and 2 small cauteries a little lower down on the part which is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind; and 1 cautery in the groin, and 1 other over the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 at the 2 sides of the groin opposite to the cautery which is between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as if applying a perfume.
And some ancients said that some people use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver, then it will burst, and a fistula will come which cannot be healed. But in this work there is fear, and now people die, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
And the most common are from the stomach and the ribs as we have said, and it is necessary that the patient lies in bed, because the rising of the cauteries is great in this work; and if he cannot stay in bed, let him be seated on a chair of straw, or a wooden chair, or a throne, and let the cauteries be lifted from where he was seated.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways to cauterize which are all good.
Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver which we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back.
And another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the cartilage where the mouse's bite is towards the left, and the elevation at which you lift the cartilage according to the shape of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, insert the two prongs until they pierce through to the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and thus you will have four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize with all three prongs. After the treatment when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is worth as much as any of the other treatments mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery does not help a dropsy patient, except in the manner that is called "asclytes." When you treat them according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not helpful, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the armpit, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the groin; and the cautery should be near the base of the heart.
Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be a spear, as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
of swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, so as to avoid the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
After that, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean it as with the other cures we have described.
of menstruation
When a stomachache comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, and also a circumferential cautery; and four cauteries around the abdomen with a fine cautery-iron, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries upon the stomach apart from the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely under the armpit poked little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the abdomen. two fingers;
and if you think his stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then on the face put .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse at all cautery clave; and let the cautery remain open long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and hold your hand so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will provide more relief.
of poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot undergo surgery or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then there comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula appears and is suppurating and exuding pus and corrupted moisture, you should test it with a thin probe, and be careful to know how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to how far the probe went in; repeat the cautery until the flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of corruption; but be careful not to burn the nerves or large vessels. If the fistula goes toward the bladder or intestines, be careful at those places and do not apply the cautery near them unless it is necessary; and think that they are not sensitive. After curing the area until it is healed, if the opening is small, you can know that it is completely healed; but if the matter does not come out, understand that the opening is blocked, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will discuss in their places.
of kidney disease When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not take effect on a woman, then you should use cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the hot-iron cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a fingernail; and he should be cauterized one or two times on the back if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved according to the previously described shape.
of the mare When the mare is cold and moist, and does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore, one should make three cauteries around the udder, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this cause, the sign is that the affected leg appears longer when measured alongside the other; and one finds the site of the displacement soft, so you must cauterize the disease upon the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used for cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive-oil lamp, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and dress it until it heals.
of the hip pain When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Afterward he should be cauterized; and the way of cautery is according to two ways: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint 3 triangular cauteries according to this form, and he makes a good depth and large, and there is between each cautery of space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are 4 according to this form:
And if you wish, he is cauterized with the cautery of the circle which we have previously said about the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
And it is the way that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, he makes 3 cauteries where the disease says that the pain holds him, and 1 cautery above the ankle joint .4 fingers, on the left side a little; and the cauteries are cuticular, and the thickness of the heart is burned; and if the disease feels that the pain extends to two or near there, he is cauterized where he feels the pain .3 or .4 points with the cautery which is called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, have him cauterized with a blade or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you don't leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you don't cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who have been cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. After that, he died from a bellyache.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, according to this method. // And they told me about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the method: make a piece of iron as big as a little finger at the tip, or a little less, and have it split into wedges, with the space between them the thickness of a finger nail; and let the wedges be an inch apart, and also shaped like nuts, and have a good handle. And here is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, then apply it to the hip joint of the patient, and turn it onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery rod and leave it for three days; then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its fearsome reputation, and few people dare to use it; yet it is one of the best cauteries for those who can endure it, wherever it is applied.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, in none of these appearances is cautery worthwhile except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is appropriate that after the patient is relieved of foul-smelling pills or other similar remedies, one should apply a line on their back, where the pain is located, three times marked with incense, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the middle-sized cautery tool according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and painful neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last spine of the back, and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you see it being cured, then cauterize it with a cautery needle according to this form.
If the cautery turns purple on each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery needle .ij. or .iij. lines apart, and let the points be close to one another. After that, cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in a place where there is swelling that is on top of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain in joints is due to moistors that are expanded throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need for you to prick on the face of the foot, if you make cautery all around the "point". And if pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery over each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries on each part, all olive oil cauteries; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand against it longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we discussed in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then prick over each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good care and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
of the root of the syphilis
When gangrene comes in the feet and the bowels descend into the groin and this is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces exit his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relaxed, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ink under the gangrene on the bone of the wrist, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery of which this is the shape:
until it is white and oozing pus. Then bring the bowels back to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not return; and treat the thighs well for the patient, and put under him 1 cushion and 1 servant under the thighs, and another one under the foot who makes him hold his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not exit when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn him, and so that through this the patient does not die or get worse.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of an ear, and for large people as large as their ears; after 3 days cure the area around the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; then cure it with other ointments until he is healthy, and make him lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well sewn together; and his bandages should be tied for a long time so that the bowels do not exit when he tries to walk around.
And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, work little, and guard against too great fullness of drink and food, and excessive loud speaking; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I shall now say something about the treatment of cutting into his shoulder. of diarrhoea
When diarrhoea comes from other bellies and is known, and you see that it is not growing any more, if the patient has a large belly, do one cautery of the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said. Some of the ancients say that it must be cauterized with the 3-angled cautery according to this form:
but first mark the armpit and draw a line over the breadth above the diarrhoea, and another across, and hold your hand in between throughout the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to a limb from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then cauterization is required with a cautery called "point", and the cautery should be adjusted according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virulence, location, twisting, and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of the previous one, for such a custom exists that it should change in the member nearest to which it is, so you must do cauteries until the patient is healed.
from mixing
The head is sometimes cauterized with great care, and especially the diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not stop or persist, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the disease, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 at the back of the neck, and another towards the front at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the scalp comes out so that the vapors of the gross humours can come out; and cauterize it on the wound according to what it is in front.
And if the wound is everywhere scattered; and it is bleeding obviously, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said in the head, and .1. cautery in the nose, and .2. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .6. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .1. large one on the groin and .1. other nearby, and .2. on the .2. shoulders; and .2. on the armpits, and .2. on the tendons of the feet, and .1. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the creases of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make .1. cautery on the bone of the wrist, and .1. other on the bone of the stomach, and .1. other on the liver.
And you should know that the more cautery you do, the more it helps, and moves to help; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And the cauteries should be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then one should apply cauteries on the limb according to its size; the cautery should be slightly warm and inserted into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cauteries are applied to the hand, foot, or back, at the site where the nerve exits that controls the limb, and in this way, the swelling is removed. However, no one should attempt this if they do not understand the anatomy of the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
of alder
When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a warm cautery according to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat it with a poultice made of equal parts of bran, lentils, rosemary oil, plantain leaves, colon blood, and almond blood; mix everything together and apply it, covered with a cloth, until it is healed.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer comes at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle all around the edge of the cancer. And yet the wise men say that one must also make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; and yet I don't think this is good, because I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen sometimes; and a more straightforward thing is to cauterize it all around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to die, either due to the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or due to the time of year; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery of which it is made:
And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the sick person feels it driven out in such a way that the course of the pustule is relieved. After the cure, let it heal perfectly.
the fire cure by iron
Another kind of illness is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corrosion or eating away of a limb, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the illness; then cauterize all over until you reach down to the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice made with oil onto the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed. After the cure, use ointments to generate flesh. And if you see after three days that flesh is healing, that is good; and if not, then restart the cautery over what remains of the corrupted areas. And this corrosion can sometimes be cured with medicine rather than fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of warts that come on the feet
Many times it happens that a disease called 'clos' according to our understanding arises in the feet due to cold, and it is a large, malformed growth that blisters the foot. The cautery for this disease can be performed in two ways: with fire or hot water. With fire cautery, you heat up an iron rod as big as a feather quill, made of good steel with thin edges, until it is red-hot, and then apply it all around the nail, turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form. Then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows and sea salt, and leave it on overnight. The nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. After that, clean the area with ointment until it heals.
And if they appear on the body and many times in the hands and feet, you should treat them with hot water cautery as follows: take a brass or iron rod, or an iron quill, and place it on the nail and the surrounding area, especially on warts; then place the rod so that it wraps around the nail, and pour a little hot water on it, holding your hand steady and pressing your hand as you turn the rod so that its edge reaches the base of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root. Let the patient endure the pain of the hot water for an hour, then leave it be, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Do this one after another until you extract all those on the body, then clean them with ointments that promote healing.
the treatment for trembling
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], you should make four cauteries or six on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with the olive-oil cautery. It will stop the trembling and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear as boil-like sores on the body, or as stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. When they first appear, one should make cauteries on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is heated in the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or with the lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as mentioned, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the surplus matter from which they came is broken, and they are healed; but this should be done after blood-letting.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great bleeding from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to light, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quiet beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful not to hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines placed on it that have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Whoever applies a tight bandage or places something hot on top, or uses similar remedies, will not find much relief if any.
And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, he should put his finger on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure until it is stopped up; and he should not remove it but keep it moist with very cold water until the blood is congealed, swollen, and stopped up; and he should then seek a physician for cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning remedies, and the properties, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from the head to the feet, and now I will continue this one on the same topic so that it is easier to find what you are looking for.
And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterization, and because of this, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. Because there are many types of people who come for treatment. Some are so attached to their illness that they would rather die than give it up, and because of the greatness of their folly, one must fear for them.Et il doit avoir paor de tels qui vienent si adroizement et si prest qu’il ne demourent por l’espousseture ne por la medicine que il demourerent por lor malice; et de ces doit on avoir grant paor, car il n’ont remede. And one must fear those who come so quickly and eagerly that they do not stay for the leechcraft or the medicine, but only for their folly; and of these one must have great fear, for they have no remedy. And there are those who give you their sense and say, "Wait, I am healed"; yet the disease is stubborn. One must not consent to those who come to you with such an attitude, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely to those from whom you can take and receive; and use prognostic and indication in treating your illnesses, for health is turned toward salvation. And this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter for you in discussion according to chapters, just as it is before the chapter on cautery, which I discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the childbirth is too strong, it squeezes the baby's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and in all those I have seen, death soon followed; therefore it seems to me that it would be better to leave the treatment in several stages.
I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer support it; and it had such an abundance of moisture that it died, and this moisture is collected under the bone above the neck, between the brain and the bone; and if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split a large opening in the middle of the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatumile:
If the cavity is deeper and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the creases of the head opening on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close again; then you should split the head into three incisions in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all moisture forcefully. After that, press out the openings with linen and powder, and apply wine and oil, leaving it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, reducing the moisture as much as possible until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens, and the collection of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus collects, and cut according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, for if blood flows and there is an evacuation of moisture, the patient may die from blood loss.
from gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away; then rub the area around the eyes with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with a 1-finger grip; then look where the vein bleeds, and the places are after the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the places with a cross, then cut both with an sharp spatulum two parts deep so that the vein bleeds up to the bone, and this should be done from the front of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upwards.
If the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut down and incise to the bone; and that which it is appropriate to put blood outside is six parts, and by chance a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains anything on the bone, so that pus does not come from it, then drain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
of emetic
When old-age diarrhea comes and the catarrh is acute, due to moistures from tears and heat in the temples and ancient delirium and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we must draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens easily by its pulse and is little repose outside when in some men who are too cold; and if it is reposed, he pulls his neck from some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and washes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
then scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and cut it well away from the tissues beneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the nail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two bones. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow freely throughout.
And draw off the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come out before the wound heals, and the blood flows gently; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery until the bones are cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have fever and is of a warm complexion.
For cautery helps to dry up moisture, so it is most helpful for moist wounds. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places it under well-made tent; and when they are taken off, they are treated with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as far as you work, hasten to cover it by cautery, or employ vitriol and stretch your hand so that the blood is stained; and if you do not have this present, put a bandage on the place so that the blood congeals, and wet the place with cold water so that the blood stops, and stretch it as it should be; and what is best and most gentle in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery knife of 2 parts, but the blade must be well-spaced to retain its heat longer. Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat. And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have marked both places, you place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart because they are not soldered by this cautery throughout; and that is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and in his forehead there is pulsation like trembling; and if their eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen off, and the eyelids are swollen and burned by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And the ancients called it "cured contused", and you should do to the patient who has this disease that he has hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is as two fingers in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two are two fingers above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound is the size of three fingers across.
from the incision that is to be on the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all of the skin between the two incisions up to the sinus that is on top of the bone, then remove this spatula.
if you put into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is smooth and not at all sharp, and this is its shape: And cut the incision towards the armpit to the heart, and the lower incision towards the bone, and bind it tightly until it reaches the middle incision. And clamp all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to the heart, and then make another incision in the middle opening to the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the wound for the taken blood; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and place moistened cloths in wine and oil and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses forming there; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large amount of cool water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment and oil of roses, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
from the eyes
When one has an acute cataract that usually occurs, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakened vision, and burnt eyelids; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then from these signs you know that those matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let it be, as it is.
And you must command the patient to look up, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control chewing; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack the two lips of the slit with old cotton, and apply tenting with linen; then bind wet cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until pus starts to flow, then treat it with things that dry up pus, causing the wound to heal.
In this way: take two parts of flower of wheat and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to these wounds to dry up pus throughout.
from the treatment of ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains or a stone or ore; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or some other object that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, then hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the pebble, apply some drops of violet oil or oil of sweet basil, then bring about extraction; and make him sneeze with a smell, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and bind pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear uppermost. Very often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then bring about extraction with fine pincers, of which here is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, then bring about extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out in this way, then make a hook of bronze and insert the end of the hook into the hole of the ear firmly, and stop up what is around the hook with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for very often it comes out as we have said. And if it does not come out in this manner, then take some glue from which birds are caught, and put into it some instrument that is appropriate for doing this, and place some cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that the abscess and inflammation will come out, and the spasm; and the manner of the splitting is such that you first make the patient lean his head back, and draw blood according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fatty part from which it depends; and let the split be like a moon, so that you come to the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is grain which is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a thin spatula according to this form:
And administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with thin pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the case of water that seeps into the ear, the patient should use a sneezing remedy made from ingredients prepared first, and pack the ear with soft cotton. And let him lie on his side with the affected ear facing down. If the water comes out through the ear, all the better. If not, take many small stones according to the size of your finger, heat them in fire until they are warm, and place one end of the stone into the ear, and strike it with another stone from above, and continue striking the stone in the ear with other stones until all the water comes out, as we have said regarding the stone. And if you see that, take a stalk, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until the most delicate stalk is burnt; then do the same with other stalks until all the water comes out, as we have said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of an insect, if it is a small body, like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the division section. But if it is a large body that can be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take a cockerel's comb, from which is taken the dye:
And it is narrow underneath and wide at the top. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of pain from the ailment; then suck firmly on the cockerel' comb; do this frequently until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the ear with cotton as I said about the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, from which is taken the dye:
And it is made of silver or brass with a narrow end and a wider top for distillation; and to press the distillation into the ear use an instrument of well-crafted brass, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the blade; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you wish, into the cockerel's comb, and let the comb be in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm as one heats it over the fire; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so effective.
the cleaning of ears
No child is born without an eardrum; and the same thing happens to men through the cleaning of a wound, or from pus forming within the ear, and sometimes this cleaning reaches deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a little discharge, which can be seen clearly.
Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a matter of painful healing in various conditions, and in this case, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane appearing, then it is working as it should.
And it should be sharp and smooth both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or the body of the ear, then grab it with thin pins and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
And if the infection is deep in the ear, take a small, thin razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the infection which the patient feels great pain in hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is closed, then take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriated copper on top; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is fitting to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling remedies.
of the charcoal of papers
This poultice comes in papers from the herbs when they are moist and dry, so you should spread them with tongs and tweezers, and the top of a spatula from its roots; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
And if without the outer skin, then cauterize with a lens subtlety, and the cautery after the incision is worth moving; and many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come in papers from herbs that look like hail in its shape and hardness, and this is why the disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the works are as follows: take care if the hail mutates from one side to another, and that is a light thing to know; then they cut it with a pair of scissors, then the skin of each part lightly, then pick it up with tweezers, and peel it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not hurt the patient; and if the split is large, then assemble it with a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it immediately and prevent infection.
And if the hematoma is descending into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and hold it with tweezers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that is not a problem; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salted water, and cure the place of what exudes pus until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is woven into the paper, and this happens most to children with no adults, and it is very painful for them, and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because their tears flow to their eyes. And because of this, they sleep on their stomachs, and their papers are under their eyelids, moistened by the inflammation and appearance that covers the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach coming out between them.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the lap of the healthy person; and then take .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moistened spatumile, not any larger than the wound made in vein opening; and cut into the skin deeply enough so that you reach the exinach; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove the bandage completely from one side between your fingers, and move your hand back and forth so that it is loose; and be careful not to push into the wound, otherwise you will reach all the way to the eye and cause bleeding.
And if the wound opens at the beginning of the slit, gently open it slightly so that it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet bandages in vinegar and water, place them on the area, and tie with a bandage.
And if there are those who bruise and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then heal the wound until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et si li maux sont sus le col ou sus la gueule, si fai boires le bestes de vin et de breu, et si tu mets sus le leu oile d’apricot et poudres.
And if the pain is in the neck or mouth, then have the animal drink wine and brew, and apply apricot oil and powder to the area.
When hairs grow from papers unlike nature, and are enveillit, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases such as laments and the softening of papers and albugine, until it leads to their destruction; and there are four ways to treat this: by cautery with fire, or by medicine water according to what is before the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and sewing or by splints, according to what I will say.
You should place the affected area in your dominant hand, then hold the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that's good, but if not, insert a needle with thread through it; and this should be done near the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing, and weave one thread throughout the entire paper, and then return it to the razing tool; next, make an incision in the area under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, all the way to the spatumile, cutting through the large and small larmier; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, and sign a figure of enche on the paper, like a fuelle of mirte, and the shape should be according to the amount you see the paper rising.
And if one needs to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is, then make an incision all the way to the spatumile along the two lines you signed, starting from the large larmier to the small; and let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair, then insert the needle into one of the angles of the wound, and then peel it all off; then bring the two lips together with a sewing needle and fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and dry up any excess thread on the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you want to use; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the sewing and threads in for three or four days; then treat the wound without sewing, using dry and compressing substances, because the paper will rise as soon as the wound heals and comes together, but sewing is painful (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear;
and if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure which is as the myrtle leaf, as we have described, with .iij. inches unfurled according to the form which is here:
then cut out what is on top with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not equal, take a needle and thread it through the figure; then take another thread and thread it through the larger ear lobe, and the second thread through the smaller one, and gather the threads between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift off all the skin you have marked as we have described, then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerot
And sometimes the paper hairs are reversed; so you must use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of the bones is as follows: you must turn over the parchment and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make two bones by art, and two thin ligatures as long as the parchment and the width of the spine; and cut two heads into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two bones out of their two formed parts; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that was strained will die and harden and fall off as it drops by itself.
If it takes time, then treat it until it heals; and when the wound is sutured and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
The procedures are such that you pierce a fine needle and thread in with a thin, soft silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be about a palm long; then arrange another thin silk thread in the case, and tie the end of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and have it exposed to sunlight so that the procedures are declared, for this is a subtle and fine procedure, then pierce the needle through the parchment directly onto the hair, drawing it up through the parchment until it reaches the case, and thread that hair into the case, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out straight through the case with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the hunt from below to the very thread that you ordered for it, until the hunt comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated and then you release it.
from the pustule of the eye
When this disease called "alacrati" or pustules occurs in the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural way and one unnatural way. It can come on suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way to treat it if it is natural is that you split the wound and separate the eyelids, and put in there tendrils of flax, and let it lie until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do, the disease will become worse than before; but you should use soft things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and sprouted flaxseed are cooked, and daisy-flower ointments melted in one of the eyes, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
And the goal of your treatment is that you take care not to let it heal according to its previous form; and these works that we have described are remedies for this disease so that it does not return to its previous form.
of the pus that comes in the eye
This disease, which is truly called "axacrati", is a natural and accidental condition. The accident comes from a wound, a split, cauterization, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle, thread it with a double thread, and insert it into the pus, piercing from one tear duct to the other, so that the threads come out at both corners of the eye; then the pus comes to the surface all around the needle, and the swollen area becomes about the size of a broad bean.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the split, turn the paper over, and make two splits along the edges within the paper; and let the edges of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision you have made, forming angles so that when they are brought together, the shape is like that of the letter "J" in the Greek alphabet; then remove the pus according to the quantity that has collected beneath, from what follows the paper, then bring the two severed parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it with the medicines we have mentioned for softening and tenting, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split under the hairs of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
And suddenly from the scalp
And if this soudure occurs in a similar manner to that of the scalp, with the paper above being separated from the white of the eye, and unable to move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore pierce the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and press it with tweezers until you grab what is open in the sphynctered subtile, which is neither too sharp nor too trench-like, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the sphyncter being too sharp and bleeding the eye; and make your incision to peel off this union lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and when all of this assembly is healed, they sometimes have watery eyes with a saline solution, and the eye is raised with soft wool; then put a tent made of linen between the paper and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the eyelid
You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervy and resembles a hard wart; the other is not nervy but resembles white congealed moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched as though to break it, cannot be broken by anyone. Both types originate near the inner corner of the eye and grow little by little until they cover the entire eyelid and obscure all light and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient should place his head in your lap, then open his eyes; hold the piece of paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small forceps and lift it up; next, take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or bull's hair through it, and double over the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, then tie the nail with a thread and lift it up, and scrape along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the tear duct down to the lash line, then cut the remaining portion at the root of the tear duct, carefully and with small forces, until you reach the delicate sphincter; leave the natural tissue of the tear duct alone so that no incision comes near it. Sometimes only the nail at the inner corner needs to be lifted and tied as described above; then scrape all around the sphincter, for this is where the form lies:
And be careful not to touch and break the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, drop a little crushed vitriol into the eye, and place a collar of litarge around the eye, leaving it on until the next day; then treat the eye as needed until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the hook cannot enter, this nail-like appearance is often cured by medicine; and it grows back as I have described in the section on division. And if you see it covered, then treat the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum, a small and sharp tool, according to this shape:
And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin out and the cuticle recedes, then drop a collar made of litarge and red copper and ground seal from your mouth into the eye; then stop up the eye until the next day. Then the next day, repeat the other procedure according to this same method, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then milk it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid causes great harm in the eye, then pierce it with an awl and scoop out a portion but not all of it, so that the body of tears does not enter; then drop into the eye a red collar made from litarge.
of the flesh that grows over the pupil
In some men, red flesh sometimes grows over the pupil, covering it and pressing against the eyelids, turning them inside out, resembling a rosebud; and the treatment is to have the patient press his head against a healthy person, then open his eyes, and cut away all that flesh with suitable instruments, holding it firmly; then cut away the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting until the end, being careful not to hurt the eye during the operation; and make the incision over the pupil as we described in the incision of the fingernail, and remove the pus with gentle pressure, as this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then apply eye salve or you may distill red copperas and similar corrosive medicines, and place a pad of egg white over the eye to protect it from hot abscesses; and if anything remains, and the pus is hot, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your treatment until it is healed, and likewise do for as many layers of flesh as are affected in this way.
However, you should adapt the treatment to each weak eye according to its natural condition; and for accidental conditions, use an iron instrument in your treatment; and do not insert your finger into any of these treatments until you see that this member can bear that treatment.
of the veins of them
Veins are the red ones that are covered under the eye, and they affect the sight and weaken it all day. So, first of all, you must examine the eye to see if anything is wrong with it other than the sebaceous cyst; then, have the patient lean his head back and gently compress those veins at their base according to your judgement, and let the base be pressed firmly in a double fold according to this shape:
And let there be two folds by degrees in one body according to this shape:
Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to pierce the eye with the tips of the spatulae, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very skillful in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the cyst.
And if you cannot collect all that in that hour, then make a poultice of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is a warm abscess, then begin again according to this method that is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the eye fistula
Examine the 'arissati' fistula closely: when you heal it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a hole in it where you must cut into the abscess, removing all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then there is the cause of this malady; it is called  'aspre chief'  and should be treated by making an incision from one side to the other, puncturing like a file as shown in the present figure.
And place it over the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while you know that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
if the site is sewn up and the wound heals, and the body of the bow is sewn up, and remains so for forty days, and it does not open again and no evil happens, then you know that it is healed; if not, there is nothing else to do but to open the fistula at its opening with a needle according to this form: then uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a 3-pronged iron, and thin out the shaft up to the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone in front of the wound, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then push down the entire iron so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through their vein if they hold their hand over their needle; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the skin grows and hardens, cut the matter at the needle; this is easier for the patient.
of the exit of the eye
When the eyes open fully all around and there is no disturbance to the brain or thinning, then you should ligature the patient; then treat the eye, then place cups or suckers without piercing to draw out, then apply a poultice over the eye made of acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then bind the eye tightly with bandages and clothes; and the manner of the clothes is that you take quite soft clothes, double each in four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten it from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to draw out without piercing; then remove the cups and leave the eye tightened day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should tighten it greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then restart the poultice and the clothes and the ligature and the cups until it is healed.
from the bursting of a web
When disruptions come in the woven web, then it opens and comes out of the papers like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then push another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the eye; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the web around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put a soft lamb's wool on top; and let it be until the threads break with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the web in each part by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes cause much distress, pierce them with a sharp spatule that comes from the bottom of the eye, and dry the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then pull until they are healthy.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", occurs only in the bowels of the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the appearance of its treatment is that you have the patient sit upright and straight, then hold his head with both hands, and move him so that you can see the bowel coming to your eyes; then let it be fixed there, and do not lower and cover the light, and let the patient see things as he used to. And if it doesn't descend underneath, know that it is water, and if the bowels don't appear as we have said, hold the patient between your hands, then take the sharp spatule and press on the surface of the cornea with it gently until the bowel emerges; and when it is issued, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled with honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healed.
of the eye waters
We have the appearance of the disease in its division, and what should be done to pierce it; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not reach him, and close and press his healthy eye very tightly; then place the piece of paper over his eye, on your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if his eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument next to the corona through the thickness of a hair in that part of the eyeball where the lesser tear duct is, then gently insert the instrument called "almagda" and turn your hand so that it pierces the eyeball, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the measure of the way of almagda should be at the bottom of the measurement of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the iris; and this is the corona of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the disease is, then express it under one way after another. If the disease comes out now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, and if the disease rises up the second way, push it down with the instrument, and when it is fixed in there and does not rise, gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand a little bit; then put in the eye a little bit of seal gem, and remove from that eye. Then place over the eye, after washing it, cotton or wool moistened in rose oil, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a slender incision, then inject alum, as we have said; and when the work is completed, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and take light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then re-bind him until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it so that the water rises rapidly.
if hot abscesses come, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, loosen the sight and put on his face an eyepatch to cover one eye, and let him remain in that dark house. And then go out of the house a little at a time, and return to his case; and know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
And one came to us who was from Persia, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, causing water to flow out, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read of it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they should be made of brass properly:
And the tips of these pliers should be of the same subtlety, and the handles in .iij. angles bent.
of the jaw above the nose
At times, various types of warts grow on the nose, and some appear like scorpions with many feet; and sometimes there are those with a dark color, and others with a light color. For those warts that are light-colored and not dark, you should make the patient sit facing the sun; open their nostrils, and cut off the wart at its root with a very thin pair of forceps, as far as you can reach, until you know that the entire wart is removed.
And if anything remains which one cannot cover, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess occurs, then lances it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is stanched and all the corruption is removed, then pour in wine or vinegar.
If the ears are affected and moisture extends to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, and the instruments do not reach to cut it out: therefore you must insert a piece of linen thread, about a finger thick, into the nose and let it hang from the nostril to within the mouth; and space the knots one or two fingers apart as it passes through the nostril. Then have the patient hold the part of the thread that comes from the nose in his hand with his thumb, and pull the other end that comes out of the mouth with his other hand, feeling the knots along the thread as it passes through the nostril. Do this until you know that the corruption has been removed, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the corruption. Then place a plug in the nostril made of soft clay for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry it out, use such medicine. This is the form of the instrument used to cleanse the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the instruments should be inserted into it; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and fill it with medicine to cleanse the nose; and there should be a handle on the instrument to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
of the heart above the chest
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the head, and it grows and becomes great sores, so much so that it is visible to the eye; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if one delays cutting it until it becomes large, take heed whether it is hard, of a dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to pressure rather than a dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then drain the patient and cut it without fear, and clean the area of dry, constricting substances.
when the nose has been cut and sewn
You should know that when pus comes from one of these broken cartilage structures, it does little good except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then you should split the .ij. lips into one stitch, then cure them until they are healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, you should scrape away all the dead tissue from their hearts until they heal, then sew together the .ij. lips into a single stitch, and tighten it, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and place an ointment over the powders, such as a strong or other adhesive ointment, and leave it in place until it falls off on its own, then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
of abscesses on the lips
In the mouth there are hard abscesses inside the lips, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should split the lips, cut into each node, and squeeze it in every part; then apply vitriol powder after incision, until the blood is stanched; then use a poultice of garlic, and clean the area with dry things until it heals.
of gum bleeding
Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus". You should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, letting the pus or blood flow; then place powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders over the wound. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is how you treat an abscess.
from sorens
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, indicating that corruption has reached the gum, and they smell bad; so you should have the patient hold his head in your hands, and press his teeth so that they are exposed, until nothing remains; and in this way, deal with blackness, yellowness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what is removed at first bleeding is good, it's fine; if not, then do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed. And know that teeth need different forms of instruments to clean them according to what their condition shows, so that the scaler with which one cleans between the teeth has other forms than those with which one cleans the tops of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
When you treat a toothache, it is important to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because it is a very serious matter and one should have no excuse for not treating it properly. Now, when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a sound tooth, and has the good tooth pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not cease at all until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen many times; and when you are quite certain of the tooth that hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all around to the gum; then you must move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers firmly; and the patient's head should be placed between your knees, and held so that it does not move.
After that, extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it slightly into each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with lint; and hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break when you extract it; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining, or by breaking the tooth, as we have seen happen many times; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine, garlic, and onions; and if there is bleeding, which often occurs, apply crushed vitriol; and if that does not help, cauterize it.Et se li estrais de la gencive et du dent s’an fust passe par le leu que li dent fu trais, si covient que tu le cauterises. Et se li estrais sont grans, si covient que li sainors soit en guarde que il ne morisse; car il n’a point de leu ou sa sangue ne puise demorer, si qu’il ne die por la saigece qu’il a perdut.
The shape of the instruments, which are mute when hitting teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you hit the tooth; these are the shapes:
And they should be made of thick, well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the mucus.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, one should apply wet cotton soaked in butter to the area for a day or two, until the gums become soft. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which resemble a surgeon's pliers; and they should be made like a file, and this is their shape:
And if the roots will not come out with these tweezers, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali", which is to say, tongs, of which this is the form:
And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root slips out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
And one should use this instrument which has two branches, of which this is the form:
And other instruments which are in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Let this instrument be outside so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master finds by himself his instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break or pierce the bone, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it doesn't slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines. And if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it out with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is pus with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp edge on its end:
And push it in and out gently due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a special file as shown in the form:
and it is like the file with which needles are made; and gently file the tooth a little at a time by hand, so that it does not move until it chips; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth is loose
When the front tooth becomes loose, whether through a blow or by falling, and the patient cannot chew without spitting it out, and you have treated it with constricting medicines without success; then it must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves. The wire should be of a medium thickness, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice around the healthy tooth, then place the wire between the teeth, whether there is one loose tooth or more, until you reach the loose tooth on the other side; then start covering again from where you began, pulling your hand gently and firmly so that it does not move. The ligature should reach the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then grab the wire with a pair of tweezers and tie it off, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it slips or the wire breaks, tie it with another wire. It will remain like this for its entire life, and this is the shape of teeth and the method of straightening them, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should do this, because sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and put in where the defect is, and tied as we have said, and it remains and serves like this for a long time.
to cover the wound of the tongue
There are two types of wounds to the underside of the tongue: one that is present at birth and another caused by a sudden injury. To treat this wound, open the mouth of the patient, hold their head steady with your hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nerve wound with a large piece of linen so that the tongue is separated from its socket. If there is any swelling or bruising due to an injury, use the unguent of vitriol on the wound, and if blood oozes out, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery tool, which is suitable for this purpose. Once the wound is healed, treat it further until it is completely cured.
And if you see it discolored, black, or hardened, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a ulcer; and if it is leaning towards a blister and there is moisture, apply the unguent of spathumile subtil and drain it from both sides. If blood oozes out during your treatment, apply vitriol until it dries up, then return to your treatment until you draw out all the pus. Afterwards, wash the area with water and soap, and treat it further until it is completely healed.
Of abscesses in the throat
At times, bumps form in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "almonds". When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, take care: if they are small, hard abscesses with a dark color, do not touch them with iron. If they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, so as not to cause bleeding; let them be until they burst on their own. If they are white in color and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for probing, but first check if the abscesses are warm and calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, his head in your lap, and the servant grip his hand between his hands and press his tongue against the instrument, which should be made of silver or thin brass, like a knife.
While pressing the tongue against the instrument, you will see the abscess; take the hook and insert it into the almond, pulling it upwards as hard as you can. Bring out any pus with it, then scrape the instrument against the abscess again, so that it forms a point; this is how it should look, like a sharp spike. The head of the instrument should be curved, one end curved in one direction and the other in the opposite direction, very thin, and made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use tongs, shaped like this:
And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils develop in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died in another day or two. And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced open both openings of the nose. I quickly then pierced one nostril with a needle, and drew out a large amount of pus; then I pierced the other nostril and extracted more matter; and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I pierced the abscess with a needle and cut away some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the opening in her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
of the liver
When the eye descends to the tear duct, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an 'uve'. When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the eye is reduced, and it is thin; and it is round and not long, and it is blood-red or a light color or black, then you should cut into it. For there is great danger in this ailment. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have described, by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from underneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. And you should not cut further than the natural limit; for if you cut more, it causes pain and difficulty in speaking. And after the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid of having it cut, then you should use a cautery on his tongue without fear. And the way to cauterize is with hot water. And it is done by the patient putting his head in your healthy mouth, and then pressing his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and applying live coals so that they are not too hot or too cool; and use this instrument, of which this is the shape:
And it has a stem at its tip where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on top of the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine flow out of his mouth and do not go down his throat and into his lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become soft and the sting of the medicine lessen. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the cautery, do so, and afterwards wash the area around the medicine with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use rose water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this way, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. And the pot should be well glued with strong clay, and in the pot there is an instrument shaped like this: And it may be of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is deadened; then repeat often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things happen there; and do not do this unless at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an egg yolk inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the egg yolk does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with salvation.
Many times a bone or fish spine, or some other thing gets stuck in the throat; so you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of salt plaster according to this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter the throat more easily, and let the head be raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it be broken, nor push the bone in; and move so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he is moved where the object is lodged; then he swallows it, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
of the blood from the throat
The blood is sometimes healed by medicine, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I have described to you. And if you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook or with fine tweezers suitable for this. And if this does not work, take a long needle and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the needle with hot iron, and do this frequently. And if the patient is suffocating from water all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it into him without swallowing, moving it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood touches the water, it will clot.
And if it does not clot as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for smoking out the throat; do this many times, for it will soon clot. And the way of the smoking is to put burning charcoal in a pot, and cover the pot with a perforated lid, and place the instrument's head in the hole; then blow your smoke into it, and have the patient put the needle in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will clot now, and if it does not, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted and dry things, and do not drink water; and then it will soon come out through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one draws out the blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers so that they can enter the throat; and it has a shape like a surgeon's forceps, and it has roughness from limed iron, so that it cannot let go of what it grabs; and see here the shape:
the chapter on abscesses
There are many types of abscesses, depending on their appearance, and they differ in terms of their perforation and size. They occur in two main ways: either due to their appearance or because of the location in the body. Abscesses in the head are different from those in the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that form in joints. Each type requires a specific treatment approach.
And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the bowel is healthy according to its completion; and there are some that need to be pierced when they become crusty and do not heal according to their completion, such as abscesses that form near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, and one waits for it to become purulent around the joint, it can often corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that member. If the abscess is near a principal member, and one delays piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member. But if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may drain and heal without issue. One must not pierce a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for those near the fundament, which may become purulent and elongated inside, leading to the formation of a fistula and prolonged healing.
And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its completion, which is when the pain subsides, the fever decreases, and there is a reduction in swelling, redness, discharge, and discomfort at the apex of the abscess, along with other signs. The piercing should be done at the highest point of the abscess, where there is movement and an opening; it should be pierced from the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all similar locations without fold or crevice.
For those who suffer from pain in a particular limb, treat the abscess according to that limb. And when an abscess is located in a fleshy area, it is best to leave it until it is fully healed and consolidated, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, you will lengthen the body from which the poison comes, and it will be filled with much filth; and by chance, the lips and depths of the abscess will harden. And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. And one should treat small abscesses with small openings, and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses, one should cut the skin and cover it when it has become like a drape and is deadened, just as one does with blisters. And there are some that are split into three angles, and some that are covered like a myrrh pouch, like abscesses in the joints; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Those that have no head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced directly; and when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in one hour but only part of it; then let the abscess drain until the next day, then draw out some more pus; repeat this several times as the pus comes out, until the boil is completely drained. Do this especially for weak patients, pregnant women, young children, or elderly men. For the pus sometimes jumps back into the body with the flow of the pus, which can lead to death without your realizing it. Therefore, be very cautious in using this method; once you have pierced the abscess, clean the wound and see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, treat it with tents made of linen or old cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, insert a tent into each opening so that they face each other. If you have cut part of the skin and lifted it around the edge, fill it with dry cotton or rag from an old linen shirt without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, use the remedies and treatments I have described earlier in this book; and if it is during winter, and the area is very nervous, place wet tents and clothes soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is during summer, and the area is fleshy, place wet cloths soaked in water, or cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, clean and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see the chapter.
of sores
And when a small abscess comes from the head, it is the nature of us who are in webs, like the joints of a spider's web, and there are many similarities. There are some that are fatty and others where there is pus; and there are some that are hard and stone-like, and there is no fear if the artery does not cause opposition. And the actions of the joints are such that you must test them all with the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes later, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then it is drawn out from above the long bone. And when the moisture is emptied, it is scraped without leaving anything, for it returns as soon as something is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and then repeat with the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you know for sure that it no longer remains at night; then cure the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess contains fat, then cut it according to this shape, from above; and gouge out your fingernails, and scrape all around, and put all your effort into drawing out the coat in which it lies; and if the artery causes opposition, then do as I told you after. And do the same with an abscess that is stony, and in cutting and curing, as I told you.
And the incision on a moist, stony abscess is lighter, for there is less blood. And if some of these abscesses have no moisture, and one came on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a pebble, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had pierced it, they would have made a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, before those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, so that mucous can exit; and they are cured as they ought to be.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses come in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are many and interwoven with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as we have said regarding the abscess on the head; and there are many appearances of these scrofulae. There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and refuse to heal. Now, when you see one that has a good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and is smooth all around, and is not adherent to the nerves in the neck, or to the artery, or to the channel, and is not deep; then you should cut it open on top, and scrape away at each side, and if necessary, cut through the two lips of the wound, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head. Then pull gently, little by little, being careful not to cut any nerve or vein, nor to cause any spasm or twitching that would make the hand jerk, and do not go too far in, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein and it will not let you work, put ground glass into the wound, or some powder that stops bleeding, and bind up the wound; then leave it until the abscess is pacified and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your task, and finish what you have started; then examine at your leisure if there are any small scrofulae remaining, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut it but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through without causing harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
And if you scrape all of the scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should proceed to cover the root of it and draw it out, and sew as we have said before. For those scrofulae that hold a superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as previously mentioned, depending on it, then treat with tenting along with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then treat with an ointment that promotes healing, until it is healed.
of squint
The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words.
For those with squint, the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", should be cut; and one must not make an incision by this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the throat's canal, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we must split it under three or four small splits, from top to bottom, between two circles, or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
and those places where it is suitable to split the epiglottis so that there is no bone, and the vessels are long in between.
And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very end, then split the cartilage until he reaches the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the soft palate as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the cutting of the vein of the finger which bleeds through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
and leaves the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed that we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and cut all the way to the cartilage without damaging it; then administer remedies that promote scar tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says to do this only until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath. Then grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a knife, thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the veins in her throat;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it, and I saw that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything except through her throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, and healed it until she recovered;
and had the young lady been bled before she was sick, and returned later to her normal state;
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of yolk, and it occurs often in women;
and it happens in two ways: natural, and accidental; where nature has no intent.
And the accidental happens in two ways, one of which resembles a boil that comes from an artery, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from a vein. And there is fear in it, and one should not operate by forcing anything except in the small one, and test and probe throughout the entire orifice. If you find it like a boil, and it cannot be opened with any force, as one opens boils, and draw it all around its coat, if there is none; and surround it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
of us
There are many ways of us, all of which I will describe their similarities:
and now it is necessary that I say all the difference between dislocation and joint dislocation.
I say that discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the swelling has passed, and the pus has been expelled; then the fever and heat will subside.
With no heat or fever or pain, and contains a pus sac which is the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and of various colors as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the ulcer, that you test and examine it first with all the instruments which are called "syringes", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is that you press on the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and slowly turn your fingers, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the membrane, then according to the size of the abscess.
then withdraw the trocar, and be careful not to let anything fall out.
If the flowing moisture is thick, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the trocar no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so do this in the shape of a cross, and grab it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side, and watch the skin where it lies that you draw it out healthy with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing is left behind.
For if anything is left behind, it will return to bother us many times;
and if a little remains and does not trouble you greatly, then treat the wound with some corrosive powdered medicines, and apply a hot poultice to the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what causes pus to flow out.
and if the vein beneath is contrary to you or another, hasten and apply powdered vitriol, and let it remain for 2 or 3 days, until the wound suppurates and the blood flow ceases; then return to cover what has remained uncovered during this time.
Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they are of 3 kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are 3 shapes that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb"; and there are also 3 kinds: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses of different sizes.
They are also like needles used for piercing sorcerers' marks, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the black-tipped ones are more effective for probing fistula tunnels.
They come in 3 sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture.
The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and warts that have two curves in three ways as well.
and warts with three curves and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways as well; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of those that are cut have a sharp point, and some only cut on one side, which can cause bleeding or damage to the nerve;
and these intrusions are the needles used in surgery, so that the patient does not feel pain when opening abscesses;
and are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the slices of an onion, according to this form, with which blood is stopped:
and sometimes it is put into the place that heals by copious bleeding of veins and arteries; and sometimes they heal according to this great form:
Sometimes men's breasts swell when they become rotten, so that they look like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen; and if anyone wants to cure them, they should cut according to this form from line b up to .g.: then cut through the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal;
and if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size, just like it happens to women, then cut through in two places above, through two similar slits; so that one clings to the other at their end, and the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.: then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient will not rest, or because of bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it dissolves the remnant and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula nodules, and some contain pus.
Those who contain pus should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove the cotton and treat with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscesses are like scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for scrofula fissures, and if the wound is closed, a cautery should be administered as mentioned earlier.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is glued together, many times abscesses occur, and likewise there is swelling of the vein and an abscess;
and if one knows it is caused by the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel .i. dislocation; and when it is in the vein, there will be a visible swelling;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and in the neck and many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and in the one who is at the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has inflammation of an artery, they should pierce through the skin on the long side;
Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and in the one who is at the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has inflammation of an artery, they should pierce through the skin on the long side; then perform incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut open the artery, so that it is exposed;
then push a needle under it and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .2 places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
then probe the area between the .2 ties of a trocar until the pus comes out and the abscess is drained;
then administer the treatment that dries up the wound, until the bleeding stops; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is on the size of the vein, you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can to the skin, then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and thread a double piece of thread through it so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, or ligature on one of its two sides with a thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will hold, insert another needle all along the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
then lance the abscess until the pus flows out, then lance the pus from the chest and leave what is attached.
then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and all joints where there are articulations, and it is a deep abscess, and its colour resembles the colour of the body, and in many cases it occurs without pain;
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin;
and it does not move in any direction - neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward - and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron, or else there might be contraction;
and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with spथमīle. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its base.
If it is large, suspend it by the root, then lacerate and scrape it, remove the bone, and stitch together the wound until it heals.
of large dangling Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to their resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick stems; there are small ones and very large ones.
and I saw .I. man who had .ii. or bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference in them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were split open, and moisture was running out of them.
I cut into them and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces. The procedure for the incision is such that you examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root;
if the cut is large, and the patient is bleeding profusely, then you must hurry with the cauterization;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a well-prepared piece of flax and tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then he holds it back, and does not stop squeezing the thread of the vein until it closes over the joint, and breaks without effort; and if the roots are thick, then one has fear of closing it similarly for the belly, but you can certainly close half.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be sure not to close the vein which is of a dark color and of poor pulse and of milky appearance.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
when the boil has broken
If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in a syphilitic ulcer, and is on the abdomen with some of the bowels protrude, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind.
And if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the protrusion of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens through various outlets. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed by hand it springs back, and sometimes it retreats, and if constricted, it grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is attached according to a certain quantity;
and if it is because of flatulence, then it is enough to touch it, and the work is that you should look at whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence. It is necessary to leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his belt and stand straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to sit down soon between your hands, then go around the area you have marked all around the mouth. then cut the abscess in half from the top to the bottom;
then cut the top half of the abscess open over the string, insert your index finger, and grab the intestine; if you pull it out of the wound, it will untie itself and push the intestines outside the abdomen.
and if you cut the gallbladder, they take it at the root, and chop off the excess.
And if the artery makes the vein contrary, go around it happily, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and pierce the two needles through what you have done in a cross that you make piercing;
Then pull the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the hole until it drains, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you cup it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said;
or you cup it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as appropriate, and close the wound.
from sores [ulcers]
We have discussed the different types of sores [ulcers] and how to treat them with medication, including the use of cauterization with iron. We have also mentioned sores that appear in the mouth, and how to care for them. The ancients say that when sores are in places where they can be reached, such as in the breasts or thighs, and similar areas, they should be removed completely when they are new. However, once they become large and old, one should not touch them, as I have never seen anyone heal from them; nor has anyone healed from them before me.
And the work, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest fullness, then prepare the patient .i. good site for the operation; then cut your onchites or ulcer, and the hair all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and express the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel contrary, cauterize it until the blood vessels are stunned; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment through medicine, and that which is treated with iron: now only this remains to be said; and one must not use iron in these two appearances: that is, tympany and hydrops, for these are deadly; therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicines, and the cure does not help, if you see that the patient is weak, or has other diseases besides dropsy, such as dysentery and similar things, then do not use iron, for there is doubt in these cases; but if you see the patient is very strong, and has no other disease except dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you must treat him thus: Take the patient directly in your hands, and the assistant presses his belly by thrusting the water to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spathumile according to this shape: It should be trenchant for 2 parts at the tip, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause bleeding.
Then examine whether the dropsy is towards the intestines: you must split under the armpit on the right side for 3 inches straight down; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side for 3 inches; and if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the fluids do not run into that weak area.
Then pierce all the way through the skin with the instrument and lift your hand up to the entire spathumile between the skin and the syfac as if you were skinning it for about the thickness of a fingernail or an inch; then pierce the syfac until the spathumile reaches the desired location, and that is where the water is, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which the shape comes: It is similar to a silver needle, made of brass or lightweight iron, and has 1 small hole on the bottom part; and 3 holes on one side, 2 on the other, and 1 on the opposite side; the head is shaped like a feather, and it is the shape of the incision from which scribes cut feathers.
At the tip above is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it will descend onto the instrument; empty about half or a third, because if you empty more than it needs in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may fall into a coma, or approach death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the ailment signify, and his pulses; then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the plug that stops the aperture that is above the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then recommence with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small quantity of water;
do this every day, and guard against following until it remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the ailment, and you leave in much water, then the cure of the sepulture or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he becomes stained from drinking; and the cure of medicines that are desiccative until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stoppage of the penis Sometimes children are born without an aperture in the penis, or the aperture is small, or it is not in its place. Then one should pierce it immediately with a very fine spatulum according to this form: then put into the aperture a very fine plug of lead, and ligature it and keep it so for three or four days; and when he wants to make urine, then remove the plug, and he makes urine, and then replace it; and perhaps one should not do it at all, because the urine which comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose foreskin is tight, if they are treated with the remedy of the skin of a young pig, as we have said, it will loosen. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are constricted, for some are born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the material cannot reach the penis, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and shaft of the penis are pulled up like a feather, as far as it will go; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, then stop the flow with that which stops blood flow, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of pustules on the penis Many times these whitlows come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are harmful and harmless ones; therefore you should squeeze them gently with a pair of tweezers, and pull out the roots, then clean and dry them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with тонконгоном until it is healed. And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you should apply cautery to it. When you have burned it, and if the ulcer is on top of the penis, and part of it is within the skin and part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is healed, cure the one outside. For when you cure them together, the foreskin of the penis is not secure from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles; so cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply ointment made of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and eggs, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two uses together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and swollen, then you should tie a string around the penis and urinate among them; and when the skin is shriveled at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape off the foreskin with an instrument made of copper, until the ligatures are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is a painful thing to discuss this, then you should scrape off the foreskin with a sharp spatula made of copper from the head of the penis and the skin; then quickly remove it between two, and place a thin piece of linen dampened in cold water so that it does not shrivel again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not dismemberment of continuation like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we do this work of our own will and properly on children, it is necessary for us to do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not tell of their children's circumcision because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing on this subject except what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greater part of masters and doctors who performed circumcision around the glans, and on strong ones, and on all a new foreskin; so the foreskin shrinks because there are two membranes, and by chance one grows above and the other below remains.
Then they heal, and the pain is doubled, and in the healing which is from the nail there is no certainty that the point of the member is healed; and in the healing of the nail sometimes the iron slips away, and they ruin the work, and many times they heal in such a way that they do not need to be healed, and I have seen it.
Of the healing that is done with strength throughout all the thread of the wound I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above and below.
Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly throughout all the threads of the wound; but let the thread be well tied around the skin, and let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then let him pull it in all the ways that he can. Then hold the rod straight between your hands, and stretch out the threads between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the tools; then bind your hand to the rod and breathe on it, and draw it up so that the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then tie it under another knot; and hold it for two days by the second ligature at the wrist and at the index finger, and press between the two knots, then lift the skin gently and draw out the head of the rod;
Then hold the rod straight between your hands, and stretch out the threads between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the tools; then bind your hand to the rod and breathe on it, and draw it up so that the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then tie it under another knot; and hold it for two days by the second ligature at the wrist and at the index finger, and press between the two knots, then lift the skin gently and draw out the head of the rod; then let the blood run a little at a time, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, in a bandage glued with white of egg cooked and tempered with rosewater, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two knees should be relaxed and straight, and the hands should be as large as the forearm equally:
The error of purification is when the wound inside bleeds; therefore, you should stretch it with your fingernail, so that the blood makes an abscess; then, press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then press.
And if it bleeds for three days, and what is under the skin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is healed and the wound slightly scarred; then press as much as you can, and beware of the part of the penis, it will not harm him in any way.
Thus treat the site of sudden wounds with powder, as we said in the treatise on powders, and if it bleeds profusely and goes above, it will do no harm; therefore treat it, as we said, until it is healed.
retaining urine
The retention of urine is due to stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or dead fetus, or similar conditions, which we discussed in the previous sections.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees, with his feet placed on his back, stretching his abdomen from above the back, and restraining himself as much as he can. This compresses the neck of the bladder from above, forcing the stone to be expelled upward and releasing the urine.
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe". Its shape should be: made of thin silver, light like the feather of a bird; the cane should be a palm and a half in length, with a fine tip.
And the method of urination is to take a double thread, and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; then squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the urine flow into the void, and if this is not done according to this order, then the person guiding the syringe is doing it incorrectly. Then pull out the thread along with the woolen ball, and let the urine flow;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
of diseases of the bladder
When blood or scabs appear in the bladder, and pus has gathered there, and you see water and medicine dripping, then use all the apparatus called a “clepsydra”, and that is its form:
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the leather tube through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can squeeze out the moisture and push when necessary;
and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the end of the syringe into the moisture and pull while squeezing the bulb; then release the bulb and push it in again; the moisture will enter the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
and this is the shape of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder; it is like this:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is larger; and under that there are two openings; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the fluid with which you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie the bladder between the two openings formed by a thin double string, and heat up the fluid on the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the penis, then use your hand to push the fluid into the bladder until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle like you would assemble a bag, and put inside what you want to use of oil and fluid and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
of stones
We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and most of these have stones at the bottom; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through a clyster, in order to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For they sometimes obstruct the retrieval of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him from side to side so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the upper part; then make him sit between your hands which are prepared with an apparatus, and his hands are underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then you can feel for and touch it inside him;
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then cut into the bladder. And if it does not move at all on touch, then moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is male, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and insert it into the urethra, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press in with your finger, and push the stone out where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upwards in his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; and let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers pressed against the anus, and let the incision be across so that it is wide on top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure of the fingers against the anus may cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there is such a stone with angles and edges: if it is gritty, it will be easy to remove; and there is also one which is beneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose removal is easy.
In those therefore where it has angles and margin, make the incision larger; and if it does not yield, then you must use tweezers which are like a file at the end, to extract the stone so that it does not slip; or insert under it a very thin instrument bent at the tip; and if you cannot manipulate it thus, then enlarge the opening a little, and if the blood flows out, then stop it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then first insert the largest into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, then draw it out, and the smaller ones after if there are several. And if it is very large, then split it, and make a larger incision. For two things can happen to the patient: he may die, or the urine may flow out through the opening that the urethra cannot heal; but in any case, try to draw it out, or break it up with tweezers, until you have extracted it in pieces.
And when you have finished your work, then pack the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and hold it there, and place a wet cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resow the patient up his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, which is known in such a way that without salt with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will be damaged and burst.
And then raise the wound with vinegar and oil and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the remedies on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot pass; then treat it as I say above, that you cut it many times, is one excuse for cutting through this treatment. I have already proven it in such a way.Et s’il est de la grosseur d’une noix ou de un ouef, et qu’il soit en l’entree del’estomac, si qu’ele ne puet issir sus le passage;
And if it is the size of a walnut or an egg, and it is in the entrance to the stomach, so that it cannot pass through the passage; take a piece of iron according to this shape and have 3 angles fixed on a stick:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the probe into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and slowly turn the probe in your hand inside the stone, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come at once, press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the urethra. It is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then push the urethra against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of female stones
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes stuck in women, and if it does, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
The third way is that one might not be able to find a woman who is skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it.
And if one must examine a woman, one should take a midwife who is very skilled, and with great difficulty force her on, and if she cannot be forced, do not use a cast of fine mire; but present her with a wise woman's bath in the manner of women, or a woman who knows some of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
And be sure to check if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and he should command her to push her finger into the anus and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move the stone from the entrance of the bladder gradually to the root of the thigh, so that the stone comes out; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where the movement appears, and feel the stone in that place; and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
then pour the wine into the wound at the waist, feel the stone, and make the wound sore enough that the stone may come out; and know that there are many kinds of stones: small ones, large ones, rough ones, smooth ones, long ones, round ones, and rainy ones (stones that have a watery consistency). Know their likenesses in order to know how they will come out.
And if the blood flows, then apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, until the stone is out. Have the instruments that I have described to you at hand to assist you in your work on humans.
And if the blood flows and it is an artery that has been cut, then apply the powder to the wound and constrict it with bandages and bandages, and don't stop doing this; leave the stone and don't pull on it at all, or the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task until the stone is out.
of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than the gathering of moisture or white pus, which is located under the membrane of the testicles, which holds the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that there is another egg; and this occurs when the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned.
And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is declining towards yellow, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and it happens in various other ways.
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have described, then the abscesses are red, i.e., slightly long like the shape of an egg, and do not open the skin, for there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are red with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin and the white syphilis, then one feels it well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe all around it, for the shape is as mentioned earlier. According to this, then judge what is inside.
According to this, then judge what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and many garments are laid beneath him;
then he sits on his left side and instructs the assistant to sit on his right, and extends the arm to one of the two ribs of the heart;
then take the lit spatulum and cut the skin of the breasts between them from the long side up to the nipple, and make the incision straight while slicing the skin of the breasts carefully according to your strength;
then pierce the plain syringe with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and let the syringe fill; and do not touch the heart of the breasts, but only the syringe; cut all around it carefully, for if you do not cut it well, the water will return;
and if the wound jumps out of place during your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished the operation; then sew together the two lips of the wound with a single stitch, and then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the skin all around the suspended area, extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
And if pus is collected in two parts together, know that they are two abscesses; then cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash the blood away and put soft lamb's wool in oil into the wound.
and put another piece of lamb's wool in wine and oil, and place it over the two wounds, and put on top double cloths, and tie it all around according to this form:
Then take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this shape, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one piece cover the buttocks up to the back, and the other cover the front of the groin, and the remaining two pieces over the two sides, and tie it all tightly around the belt loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this cloth cautery is used instead of an iron implement, and you should hold a small knife-like cautery gently against the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have described, so that the white substance containing the water is revealed;
Take the cautery according to this shape and pierce the testicle with it, and burn it with this fine hot cautery:
And scrape it in every way you can, until you extract everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this method is safer; and beware of bloodletting and the dangers of cutting.
and if nothing contradicts you, then treat any abscess, bleeding, or other condition according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the pus is drained,
have the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its lowest point to the depth of a finger's breadth, and insert the probe deeply into the body; make the holes large enough so that all the pus can flow out;
then place cotton on the wound and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining pus, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white membrane does not allow the water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a tube or instrument used to treat dropsy, as described earlier; and open the wound slightly, and let the water flow out, and it will accumulate again after six months or so, and when it has accumulated as before, then the patient's days are numbered.
of the testicle abscess
Know that in this branch of medicine, there are many dangerous dispositions, and therefore I believe it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you about the procedure and what the abscess should look like.
I therefore say that many abscesses come about in the body, especially in the testes; and this happens in many cases.
This is due to an abundance of sour and bitter humours, which are spread to the testes, or from a blow;
and the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body; and it does not cause pain, and is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there are grey, purulent, and pus-filled abscesses, and sometimes they come from a burst artery, or inflammation of a vein.
When it is a burst artery, it is known by the warmth of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
That which is caused by vein inflammation is known through its appearance when pressed with the fingers,
and one can properly make an incision based on this appearance, and on other characteristics; and you cup the heart of the testicles, then they rise up, and the thread comes out from under the white sac, and free the suspensory ligament all around the testicle.
If the testicle is already swollen with these new bumps, then you must therefore draw out the testicle and cup it;
and if it is swollen in the sac, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension and cup it smoothly.
And if the swelling is in the rear location, then you must cup it all and extract the testicle, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, then cover the wound with soft wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to .i. bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient feels great pain when he walks;
and the treatment for this illness is just as difficult as the one described above.
Nevertheless, we will tell you about its treatment according to what the ancients did.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your fingers, as well as all the vessels that are near the penis, and grab them firmly, and stretch them forcefully;
then cut wide through the vessels with a spatula, so that they are exposed,
and then scorch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the screw came out, and ties it directly to the other end; then he cuts them straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as with the others, except we bind it tightly, so that no blood vessels burst to either side;
for in this way no harm comes from it, and if all the vessels are empty, one must milk out the testicles through all the vessels; so that the vein does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot help themselves.
from the rupture of the sinus The causes of this disease are either the rupture that leads to syphilis, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from their normal location into one of the groins.
This rupture can be caused by two things: either from a punch or kick, or from lifting a heavy object, and similar actions.
The signs that it is caused by the swelling of syphilis are that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly. And the abscesses are even throughout, pressing on the intestines because of the swelling.
And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close to the surface, and this is due to the escape of the intestines and the body from the syphilis.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the feces, and are held back, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain.
And the method of the treatment is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand inside the wound, if he can return them; then let him sleep on his back, between your hands, and gently lift his legs;
then they stretch the skin of the scrotum upwards, and cut all around the testicles; then put in the probes into the groin according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the blood can flow out;
then cut off the foreskin under the skin of the scrotum, as much as the white foreskin is hard all around;
then put your index finger into the opening of the scrotum, in between the white membrane which is under the testicle skin, and between the second membrane.
and push the testicle towards the scrotum with your left hand, and hold the white membrane taut upwards in your right hand, and lift the testicle out of its sac towards the body; and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the sac;
and feel with your fingers if there is any wrapped intestine or tough white membrane, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen;
then take a needle with .1. thick thread made of .10. threads, and pierce the posterior part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .4. threads; then tie them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the scrotum, which we said was under the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of .2. parts; then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly at .2. parts, so that none of the veins that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there; and put the thread according to the first long line .2. fingers from that one, and after these .2. lines leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles the width of a finger;
and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cup in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then administer the ligature that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
For it happens many times, and let the ligature stay on until it bleeds; and if it is slow to bleed, then use hot water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds.Et s’il ne peut cheoir, si doit être incisez sus la piere, selonc que li semblet a voire, et laine moillie en oile, et liien, si com nos avons dit ci devant.
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is performed like the ramifica that is together with the vein, in such a way that you ligature the vessels, after the incision gently from above downward;
then bandage me tightly, and lance the abscess of the one who opens it, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there is internal bleeding, as we have said, and the opening appears; and none of the intestines come out into the rectum, and if any do, it is a little, and they heal quickly.
However, if he stays too long in this position, the wound or fistula will become infected, causing the intestines to protrude.et se leu est grand et large, et les intestins pendent, si covient il que tu remettes li cuitel en son leu sus l’estomac, et tu tiens li cuitel si fort que tu puisses,
And this happens due to the extension of the fistula in the intestines, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, and the opening appears;et se li intestins sont en dan, si covient il que tu trusses li cuitel de touts costez, si fort que tu puisses.
and the treatment if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press the location of the rupture gently with the tip of a large needle according to the size of three beans;
then pull out the skin tag underneath the skin and take a piece of rag and put it over the visible skin tag;
then press on the stomach, then cut the two locations on the skin tag on the head of the rag, and cut one and the other;
then pull out the head of the vein and do not cover it with syrup or stretch the udder or anything else, as I have informed you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in a hernia, and cauterization is beneficial in this case, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts within are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, he should have the patient lie on his back, and cut away the skin which is softened above the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch, and if you see fit, sew the superfluous soft skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of castration
You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, and because of this, I would rather not discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the veterinarians can respond when asked, and know how to treat [the animals]; the other is because we often need castration to help certain beasts, such as bulls, rams, horses, and other animals. I say then that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the method of castration by attraction, you make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then grab them with your hand and squeeze until they are removed and you no longer feel anything. As for castration by cutting: you should tie the animal down, and cut the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then cut each sac at one cut, when you have well scalded them; I leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; this method of castration is better than the one by attraction, because in the one by attraction, something from the testicles may remain, which causes the animal to desire sexual intercourse; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds: one like men in that between their legs there is an aperture like a woman's, with pubic hair, and sometimes they urinate from it; the other kind is like women, having a small penis on the underside of their scrotum and two testicles. In both cases, treat them as you would any other patient; for those who are more like men, where the urine flows from the skin between their testicles, there is no treatment.
of the testicles
Tentigen is an abscess on the natural part, so disfigured that it is painful to look at; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. You must paint over the excess of the tentigen with your hand or fingernails, and scrape it gently; do not press too hard, lest bleeding ensue, then cure one disease with another until it is healed. There is also an abscess that emerges from the mouth of the uterus, resembling a cow's udder, and for this reason they call it 'cow disease'. You should scrape it as you would the tentigen, as we have said, and cure it until it is healed.
of Errata
An errata is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is narrow; and it can be due to genetics from birth, or an accident from illness that came later; or it could be caused by a foreign object, or a thin or thick discharge, and is made deep within the vagina, or on the sides, or lower down, wherever it may be; and they should be examined during conception and childbirth, and perhaps during flowering as well. Knowledge of this comes from observing the dance. If the discharge is apparent nearby, either between your fingers or close to the vagina, then act quickly: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form a seal with your fingers so that the thin discharge is stopped, and cover the discharge with wool soaked in oil. Then have the woman lie down for several days so that it does not heal over. If the discharge is thick and hard, you should treat it similarly to a spasm like one would with a myrrh leaf. If the discharge is from an abscess, then it should be treated by soaking in vinegar and then covered; and have at hand medicines that stanch blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then insert a large piece of clean linen so that the wound does not heal over; and keep it this way for a long time, and use other treatments until it is healed. And when there is a discharge from an abscess in the vagina, one should not touch it to treat it.
of Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins from which blood flows incessantly, and when they are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in a previous section. I will now describe those that can be cured. When hemorrhoids or thrombosed veins are completely out of control and no longer respond to treatment, then one must use cauterization with hot iron. Those that can be felt at the edge of the anus can be treated, but those that are deeper cannot. First, the patient should be placed in a cool room, then the hemorrhoids should be tightened with ligatures, and their roots should be cut, followed by the application of powder made from astringent medications such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense. Then, the feet should be immersed in cold water for an hour, and if there is any bleeding, the patient should be bathed in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar ingredients. Then, take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to the back. If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on the back and breasts without using iron; then take woolen cloth, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood bark infusions with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. When the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointments until it heals completely; and if there is one called "albathir", which is red and resembles a rough patch, it should be covered as I have described for thrombosed veins, and then treated until it heals completely.
Here is the translation of the next sentence:
Here is the translation:
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs: when you see a woman struggling to go down, and desiring to smell aromatics; then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother's superfluities are cleansed by good purification; and those who come in other ways do not come naturally. For sometimes they come on their feet, and come out of the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or they come on their stomach, or back, and are accidentally turned onto their neck, and in many other bad shapes; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and cunning in these matters, and beware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
If the child comes out on its head by natural delivery, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a chair or have women hold her; and give the midwife a small sponge soaked in rose oil or fried fenugreek between her fingers, and then insert it into the child's mouth: and split the afterbirth, and squeeze its nail until the moisture that is inside flows out; and press the mother's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be enema with a fenugreek mucilage of sisamen oil; then make her sneeze and cough up phlegm, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out. And if both hands come out, then you must gently pull them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and make the woman defecate so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then grip the hands at the knuckle that is placed in front as mentioned earlier, and pull out the child, and reset it in the same way.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child is born on its feet, it should be turned upside down. And then turn it slowly and gently until it is straight;
then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out slowly.
When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to catch, and make it sneeze with scent. if it jumps out, God willing.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back little by little, until it is in its natural position. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of vitriol, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman inside and out then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is soaked underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump out now. for the child to come out onto his knees When the child comes in this way, then put the midwife's hands on him little by little;
of the child's exit, which comes out wide a hand's breadth We need to figure out how to bring back the hand: if we cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then administer the medicine that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then study to bring the hand back; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grip as the child emerges.
from the emerging of the child onto its neck, and spread out his hands, and turn his face towards his mother's back I want to grab her hand, then slowly turn it, and gently wiggle it;
and when it is even, put on the muscle a poultice of honey and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way for all of the secondine
in the same way for all of the secondine When it comes out in this way for all of the secondine, then scrape the secondine at your fingernail, as long as the moisture is discharged.
and if the child lies on its face and neck, and the mother holds it back, it will not be restrained and the child will die;
then put the child inside, so that you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but happens rarely. Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long if they are born too soon.
I know that they are multiple, and are separated by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they are born just as naturally as one baby, as we have said.
And if they are bleeding profusely, then the treatment as we have said, and the assistant should be skillful, and quickly and lightly perform what she does; and do thus as it is best for their health. of many children
of many children Some are formed in the womb 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or more up to 15, and are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise glorified.
and the surgeon must know all this, for by chance a similar thing might happen to him; then he should act accordingly.
of the dead child
When you are curing a woman of childbirth, as I have said in the previous chapter, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual intervention; if you must know whether the woman is of sound body, and has no accident or fear of death;
the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply the ointment of .ii. parts, or she will be bound to the bed if the child is not delivered;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with alder and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks; then gently tap them, then press them where they are convenient to this,
and be careful that the infant is not equipped so that it descends upon its head; if he thrusts the fingernails into his own eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the ribs,
and if the descent is on the feet, he should thrust or pinch and press the middle parts;
and he should dye the hair on his right hand, and place the cloth between the fingers of his left hand, and tie it tightly all around his hand, and insert the needle into any of the places we have mentioned, until he reaches the hollow;
then insert it against another needle, or a third one if you need more, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be moved equally from one side to another, in order to move it out, and the needles should be bitten down to hold it in place, as shown in this illustration:
And if some of it remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and rub that part with it, and pull at the other part.
and if nothing remains, then put this joint higher up, and do this until it all comes out firmly.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it up in a cloth, until it is fully extracted;
then cut into the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do to the other hand and foot.
And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or if it has an acute, gathered mass on its head, you must place the spiny spatum between your fingers, and open up the head and extract the fluid. or you can use the instrument called "almidach," of which the shape comes from the instruments or chapters that follow this one.
and so also naturally the fetus in the womb; and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and it is forced out, it should be split so that the moisture which is in the wound comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, the pulsing is light, and the pulse at the mouth of the wound is weak.
And if there is swelling in his belly or his feet, then you must apply a hot compress wrapped around your hand; and open the belly or the foot, so that the moisture which is inside runs out;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then he should put his hand into the wound and pull it up to the mouth of the wound; then he should take a hook or two, and pull it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, then one must administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and use hot water that is softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its back, and you can lay it flat, then administer what we have said for a living child;
and if one has no strength, then carry the body away in pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta.
And when you have done this, if he is affected with those abscesses that come in the sea,
and bloodletting comes about, let it be placed in restraining water, and let him receive other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose fetus had been dead inside her belly; then another was sewn over it, and the other one died as well. After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and it swollen so much that it opened up and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attracting poultice, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more. I was very astonished, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and found bones beneath, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman walked like this for a long time, and then suddenly a little bit of blood came out from it.
And I remember this chapter especially because when the masters find something unusual, they know how to treat it effectively.
to bring the dislocation back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is equipped in books; and at two turns of the two sides of the two lines. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of boxwood or ebony;
and the mouth of the staves should be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit apart, and their length a palm and a half; and in the two sides should be two ajustments of this same wood, which are firmed in one and the other, a half-palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are put into the mouth of the wound to open it when one turns the two horns.
Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ivory or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers; and has two heads two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the wound with all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then bind the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument under between his thighs; then work your hand along the instrument, just as you did with the forceps, according to the amount that you see the opening of the marrow, so that the operator does what he wants.
These instruments are all tapered and have multiplied their likenesses; and when the operator has prepared them, they are more nimble in their work and more effective for people due to their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze using a condiment, and squeeze her hands to her mouth and nose. And if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pot and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calming agent, rue, anise, chamomile, casia lignum, and centaury.
All of these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot over fire. Then put one end into the pot's spout and the other end into the mouth of the mother:
and the tinder until the smoke comes inside the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said. Then the scabs will fall off quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, then order the patient to soak her left hand in oil of sesamum or in a poultice of alder, and then wash it in the natural way.
and she will find the scabs; and she should pick at them and pull them off bit by bit gently so that the wound is not hurt. but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will then come out and separate.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and the fuming of herbs;
and if it does not become looser from all that we have said, then beware of pulling;
but it is necessary for the one who is at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with an ointment of tetrafarmacon;
if she vomits and expels it, and comes out; but nevertheless, when she vomits, it gives off a bad odor in the stomach and head, and weakens the illness.
If this is the case, then suitable smoke treatments are needed: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman is for the retention of flowers and secondine if it is this:
And it is made of glass, resembling a cane, and one puts the fine end in the nature, and the wide end above the fire;
and there shall be smoke over the coals, and the mould until it is destroyed, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born without their foundation being pierced, but instead have a thin, subtle membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and keep the baby from moving so that she does not touch it.
then put on warm wine and oil, then the ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden peg in the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
And sometimes the clotting comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a peg of wood.
from the fistula in the anus Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that originate in other parts of the rectum, or in the space between its two walls.
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens up, and usually releases a white pus or thin fluid.
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are caused by what comes out of the body through flatulence or emissions when the patient passes gas, and sometimes a little bit jumps out.
And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they can reach the hip joint, and the head of the thighbone.
And thus one knows the fistula, which seeps at the anus, and does not seep; and you pierce your index finger or anus, and pierce a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then pierce it with a thin tent of lead or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair in your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out of the orifice with excretion or wind, as we have said: Know that she does not pierce; then heal quickly.
And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urinary tract, and the urine flows out, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent is placed up to the spot. If there is no pain and the tent is removed, then it is healed without medicine or ointment.
and for these persian fistulas there is no treatment other than hard work and the folly of those who meddle in them.
In that which is not persian and is not old, there is hope of healing through iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips tilted towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent comes from.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your finger.
then feel if the tissue is piercing your finger; and if it is discovered where you feel it between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is piercing; if you cannot work on it, it cannot be healed.
One can still heal some, but it happens rarely;
and if aid is given, one should heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and insert it into the fistula as far as the base; and do this .2 or .3 times, until you know that the burnt flesh, which resembles an owl feather, has been removed;
and then treat it with moist bandages soaked in butter until the dead flesh comes away, and then apply ointment to heal and seal the wound.
If it is healed in this way, that is good. If not, then it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the bone which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering down to the heart; if you cut into the beginning of the fistula and push in the tent before it, and then cauterize after it, until it reaches the tip of the tent;
and the tent will be released and fall out; then cut away those false meats that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus flows out, and enters between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or a medicinal agent.
For fire cautery brings about two things: scorching of the flesh and stopping of blood and drying up moisture;
then dress with tent-canvas moistened in butter or ground substances until the pus runs out and the flesh heals;
then treat the wound with ointments of heating herbs that are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or in the fundament, and explore inside.
If you feel the tent, and between them is the membrane or skin, or it is about to burst, then there are no forces that can stop it except through one of three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before.
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the lining that holds the fundament, and let the evacuations come out through there instead. then cure, as we have said;
then cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once the ulcer is cut away from the bone, or with a sharp instrument; then probe the wound, as far as you can;
then examine the wound and seek to heal it, and keep the fistula in the part above the bone: if there is any lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas according to this method: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above. take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape: And he puts a twisted thread into 2, and puts the tent all the way through the thread into the fistula as far as the tip.
If it is piercing in the margin within the foundation, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger on the foundation;
And draw the head of the thread, and gather the two heads together, and squeeze one against the other, and let it be for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, until the threads catch the hairs that are between them, and pull them out;
then dress the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
If the fistula does not open, then make it open in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
For one must not bandage it tightly for a long time, and then treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spiny sputum, which one makes into a fistula, is very sharp and pointed on one side. and on the other side it is smooth, so that it should not be bandaged as it should not be, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: sometimes they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones; they often cause blood to flow out. There is one or more of them, and some are outside the anus and some at its entrance; but those that are outside have less moisture.and are smaller:
and sometimes they discharge a little yellow water or a little blood, and their color is like that of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain until they go out in a bowel movement, and then the hemorrhoids will come out; If you are in a hurry, and can't use tweezers, hold it with your fingernail, then grab it at its roots;
and if they can't hold it due to moisture, then grab it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; and pull them out with your fingers, then grab and twist them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on them that is in place of cauterization; or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then enema the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly;
if the patient defecates, and if the thread comes out of the anus, then the treatment is light; and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and no longer fear an incision with iron.
If you need to do the sewing in this way: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then bring the two ends of the thread above the needle, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too large; tightly pull the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw out the excess blood;
then place on the wound a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or with cerate, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat the wounds with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
from dryness of the penis or anus Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constipation, and because of the natural confinement, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Then you should cut the skin at the tip of a spatula or your nail, so that it does not become moist. Then he should be bled until he is healthy, as is appropriate.
And if he cannot become healthy, then the bleeding should be repeated more aggressively than before, until he is healed and bled; then treat until healed.
where there is trembling A flea is a small creature that moves quickly throughout the body,
and sometimes it bites and can be felt like a trembling, and it affects the whole body, but especially the hands more than any other part.
And the treatment is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or from the fat of a strong vulture, and place this candle on the wound, so that the purple circle encompasses the entire wound. Then return your hand to the candle and stroke all around the wound, pushing it in deeply and pulling out the wound from its roots.
And if you see that it is made of an iron or steel candle according to this form, and it is subtle underneath and drawn above:
do not pierce it, so as to hold the wound, and to press it And if you see that the wound is cauterized, as in the chapter on cautery.
of the form of the enema Sometimes the enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or hammered; and sometimes they are made from these small and large instruments, according to those who use them.
Those who administer treatment for children and the feeble and painful, are small.
The form of the enema, whether small or large, is placed above, or the abdomen is bound according to this method:
and has a protrusion where the belly is tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes,
and between each hole there is a distance of one digit, then tie into these holes a strong thread wound in a spiral around ten or so times, and assemble the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then colonoscopy; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently.
Then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together, until it is completely empty, then withdraws the syringe and leaves the patient's legs exposed,
and if the medicine wants to come out, let it leak as much as it can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even more helpful.
And if you syringe him for a disorder of descending stomach, and the medicine rushes out, then you repeat it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the enema should be as fine as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema that stretches the skin:
of wounds
We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The things that make wounds are by the impact of stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or staff, or arrow, or similar objects.
Or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a blow from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess quickly: then let him bleed from the head itself if there is a little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
and let the patient avoid excess wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and let him not drink wine or eat meat;
and place sorrel on the wound, if a hot abscess forms, use cotton wet only in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding and has not been moved by the air, powder which I will describe a little later;
and if the burn has been moved by the wind, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be closed with sutures, then close it by sewing it shut, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and open, and only attached by a little, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods like testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat and similar things.
And if you find rot in the skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut off the rotten part completely, and then cure it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put this powder on so that the burn has healed.
And the way of making the powder is this: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and ground it finely. and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly until it heals well and joins back together with its blood;
bind it tightly, and leave it bound if it is not swollen, for one does not remove the bandage until the wound has healed.
And sometimes one applies chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but one should move the wound with the cautery.
And if the cautery has moved the wound, one should not put any of this powder on it;
but one should apply certain digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft; and treat other treatments until he is healed.
And if the fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then pull it out with fine tweezers;
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck are cut.
If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the wound heal and not put anything constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw.Se c’est l’artere, si faut la cierer. and not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuations are with the brain, which is the highest member;Car la chaleur les meut et li sang est chaude.
but for medicine, as with clean chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water, and other mineral stones in this way, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut it and bind it, then heal it until it is cured.
And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of fluid, then pierce it or lower it;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then it should be stopped, and ligated, and cauterized if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage is guarded through which food travels, if one cuts above the cane of the throat, and does not touch the throat but resets it according to its natural shape; and then he stretches it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then he treats it with purifying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then he will; and if there are bone fragments, if you can pull them all out, and those that you cannot reach, then leave it until the wound heals. and let it heal and close up the wound.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in its chapter.
of the wound from a spear or knife
If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the patient breathes with difficulty, then know that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep but fresh and bleeding profusely, do not apply the powder at first or ligature it for fear of causing fainting, and returns to health, and heals the illness; but it applies an attractive ointment, and binds it .ij. times a day;
and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to soak up moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there will come no spasms, nor trembling of the heart, nor twitches of the eyes; and when you see the good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and keeps weeping, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it thus as it should be treated.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, on the front or back, then the treatment of that which is in front.
if it is large, then stitching; and if it is small, then powder; and if it is deep in the bone, and has chipped off pieces, then want the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are dislodged. and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound fester, so that it will push out the foreign bodies.
And for other wounds in other members is the judgment as we have said.
of a rupture of the belly
There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly. The great one is when the intestines burst out of the abdomen, and they must be returned to their place as quickly as possible, and then the patient should lie on his back for four or five days, until the wound has healed. If it happens that he cannot bear to have them returned to their place, let him hold a heated iron against the rupture until he is able to endure having them put back in; otherwise, let him die. If this happens at night, the patient should be wrapped tightly around his waist with a cloth, and then the intestines can be pushed back in the next day. The medium one is when only the membrane bursts out, and it can be returned to its place without any difficulty. The small one is when only a little wind escapes.
from the great wound, except sometimes for the intestine or the nerve of the intestines, by which they enter.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one.
because one can no longer put the intestines back in if they are not gradually warmed. and when the intestines feel cold they contract at once and cannot be put back in.
And so the wound heals more easily, because one puts the intestines back in their place little by little along with the others.
And you should know that there are four types of hernia:
the .ij. common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen,
and the suturing of other wounds on the body and .ij. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one and declare each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and some intestine is protruding, and if it is difficult to reset, it can be done by one of two ways: or because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to coldness.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: soak a sponge or soft cloth in warm water or you can boil in water squills and cypress and pepper, and pluck the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this wine-based remedy is made, and it helps to soothe and reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling go down, then moisten the intestines with water or with a mixture of herbs that have been cooked. for it is constipated and needs only a little to relieve it;
and if he cannot pass anything, they make a small cut with an instrument used for hemorrhoids;
and the first remedy is better than cutting, that one must not cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
cut inside the curve and not outside, and see the shape here:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is best.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, and puts his legs above his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ii. parts if you put your understanding into it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus one should manage what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds, use what you are skilled at,
then have in your hand .i. minister pitous [a poultice] that covers the entire wound with its hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of suturing,
and this is the common method of suturing, and you should thread a needle or multiple needles, depending on the width of the wound, then leave about a finger's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierces the .2. heads of the skin with the .2. heads of the syringe,
then it pulls with a doubled thread around the needle of .2 parts, then assemble the two parts of the wound smoothly,
and then leave a space of two fingers and insert another needle; then tie it to the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the way through the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot pierce well: one must place the needles opposite to where the arrow came from; for it is not advisable to go too deep, or else one might break the limbs. That is why they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals;
and then cover the ends of the needles with wax or a similar substance so that they do not hurt the patient when they sleep, and place towels or cloth on the ends of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or at most two.
The second sew is common, and you shall sew together the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the syphac together on a needle with a strong thread; and when you have sewn these heads all four together,
and when you have sewn these heads all four together, then re-insert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner that one sews drapes;
and place a distance between each stitch of the thickness of a small finger;
this cloth seven men,
and I sewed up a wound one man had in his belly,
who had been stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm-width long, and cut out the intestines, leaving them about two palms long.
and stitch up the wound in the belly. I returned the intestines to their proper place after they had been out for twenty-four hours,
and the wound healed within fifteen days, and he recovered.
And they had judged him to have died, and this was a miracle.
and I did not treat it with ointments, for I was in a place where there were no such things as ointments or medicines; and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now, I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and pierce it through from outside to inside;
when it has pierced through straight into the heart, then pull out the needle where you inserted it.
and have her pierce from another spot inside out to the outside;
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the leatherworkers do with hides, and let the ointment remain on one side while you dress the other, until the stitch is completed all around.
The second method of stitching, which Galen describes correctly,
if it is like some people do, who unite the two parts naturally, and they apply one of the cut heads to the other head, in such a way:
stick a needle or sharp instrument close to the pain, and pierce only that spot and leave the two gums of the ulcer then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside just into the inside, as the two gums of the ulcer
then pierce both sides of the deflecting part to the inside, in two other small holes that are on the opposite side;
and this is the usual and most common way to sew.
Galen says this, and some testify,
that one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each;
and one needle must be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew sores;
and know that when the hernia is in the abdomen, the incision must be made lower than other places in the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is the same as the judgment of other wounds:
and it happens that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the fire has moved it, then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place the cauterizing charcoal
then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place the cauterizing charcoal and if the fire has moved it, then place some ointment on it while the wound is bleeding; and tie the thread, and sew the edges of the wound, and the membrane; then heal the wound as with the others until it is healed.
and if you have no medicine, put on old cotton as soon as it starts to leak fluid, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine for various wounds when they are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal limbs, then you should moisten a light cloth in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the ankles and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or swelling in his bowels, and this happens frequently, if you enema with red wine, especially if the constipation reaches the intestines;
and it pierces inside, and you will know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is raw, and it is because of the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the testicle pops out of the wound, put it back as far as the intestines, while it is fresh;
and if it has become old and turned green or black, then you should tie off the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it, because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two fingers during the part below the wound to relieve the extraction when the sutures are cut and the wound is cleaned.
of the wound from the boiling
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people,
because I saw a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and discharged fluids, and he experienced flatulence and winds;
I treated him according to what I knew, and did not cease to apply poultices until he was healed and the wound closed.
And when I saw him sweating, I suspected that the patient had pain in his belly; and he did not suffer any harm, but remained in good condition, eating and drinking;
and some experimentalists say that when there is a minor wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take fine thread from a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the tremor has opened its mouth, it puts itself on top of both lips;
then it has another tremor in the same way as before, until the wound is completely healed;
and examine the wound. If they pierce the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
one can sew up the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this intestine thread which is very charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a thin twisted flax thread, then thread the needle, and sew up the intestine, and return it to its socket;
and this way of sewing up a hernia is not useless except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is neither healing nor health without subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a "fistula." especially when it is lumpy and swollen.
And a fistula is according to the green [vein] a hardened, white node, where one does not feel pain, and it is as thick as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it is clear and thin, and sometimes thick. sometimes it is small, and sometimes large;
and I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not cleaned and has no scabs, this is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is, by the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is a hard lump within, and on the lips, which does not let blisters form; or because there is too much mucous; or because the meat is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because corruption is a form of pestilence; or because the nature of the region is to digest late and to be healthy late, and to swell naturally; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Then I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula, which is done manually.
You should know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or in the face, intestines, bladder, or anywhere in the body,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this way are of sad healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you have confidence in the cure, and you can see it if you take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then want it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search with a thin tent of lead, because lead bends around the crookedness;
and if the fistula has a narrow opening and you cannot probe it well with a tent, if you cleanse through one of its openings,
because moisture quickly passes from one opening to another, and cleanses;
then you can let it bleed as much as you can, and know whether there is bone or nerve involved, and whether it has been bitten by a snake;
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it;
and when you know for certain where it is located, whether it is distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have instructed.
or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have instructed. and remove the putrefied flesh and corrupted matter within; and then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the fistula is deep and straight, you must pack it as deeply as you can, then put wet tents in the medicine, and push them into the head of the fistula,
then put wet tents in the medicine, and push them into the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then put on healing ointments until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve causes you grief in your main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption is removed, then treat things that are infected with a cautery until they are healed;
and if it is not healed, and the wound returns as before, know that you have not yet reached the spring;
if you uncover it and want to reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way except by fire cautery;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if extracted by an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, pull them out one by one and leave none behind.
and if the moisture is causing opposition, and there is no error or fear, if it catches fire and becomes moist and charred, and frees the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something causing pus to flow, and let it remain until the pus flows around the bones,
and then they will have an easier time removing the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then scrape off all the blackness until the corruption is completely removed, and then dress the wound.
And if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches down to the bone;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. if it needs to be bandaged and wrapped all the way up to the rottenness, and then treated until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg: so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that originated within the body:
as long as the matter went to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no reason to fear opening;
but the surgeon through their folly operated so much that the abscesses opened, and a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came from which the body bled and moaned;
and many surgeons treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine,
as I was summoned there, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the openings with great quantity; and became red in colour, like that of a young boy, and had a yellow tint.
I pitched a tent over one of these openings, and then searched all the openings,
and I found that some veins came together from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and probed one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and piercing, and the corruption went all the way to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken out;
and began to heal the wound with hot medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found that the corruption had continued into the bone, which I cleaned and then removed, and then I struggled to heal the area;
but although I tried as much as I could to heal it, when I cut into the bone by about half a palm's width, and removed all of its rottenness, then he was restored with medicine; and he was healed and sewed up hurriedly,
and the work did not need to be recommenced except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of his death. For despite the bloodletting, he was completely healed,
For despite the bloodletting, he was completely healed, and was born a hard lump in the bone, and had good temper and no harm or contrary pain anywhere, neither when sitting nor standing.
and hold the head so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is infected, so that the infection does not spread to the flesh; and put a hot iron or a board underneath the bone to cover over the corrupted flesh; and one must examine as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and examine again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part [of the body], then uncover the flesh completely; then place a hot iron underneath,
and then examine from one part of the corruption to the other, and let him examine the area around the corruption a little, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and the bone which contains it on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way to cut it;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand, or in the wrist of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire about the corruption, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but do not let the vein or nerve cause you harm.
And know that there are many different types of bone-cutting instruments and sutures for covering the bones, depending on the position of the bones and the appearance of the wound. And their thickness and their thinness, their length and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of wound with its appropriate instrument.
and know that your work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you think about the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
fire The shoulders may suffer dislocation due to internal causes or external forces.
And when you have treated this erosion with various remedies, but they are ineffective, then you should cover the affected area up to the site of the erosion, in order for the patient to escape death or the greater harm caused by the defect in the limb.
in order for the patient to escape death or the greater harm caused by the defect in the limb. and if there are signs that the limb becomes black, as though it were burnt by fire, and after the blackness, then goes the corrosion of the limb from one member to another, and affects throughout the body; so you must hasten to cover it,
and if it is through the sting of some venomous beasts, such as the scorpion fish and adder and similar creatures,
if the corrosion is on the head of the elbow, then cut it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and it is not worth lessening the amount of its virtue;
and do this when rust comes to the foot: if it comes at the first joint, then the claw follows the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then claw all of the foot; and if it climbs up the leg, then claw at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to cauterize the disease so that the patient dies;
and the way to cover or bandage the limb is to tie it above and below, and one assistant pulls one of the bonds downward, and another assistant pulls the other bond upward, and you loosen the flesh that is between the two bonds to a width of one digit, so that the bone is exposed;
then cover or bandage it, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy area, and brings about other injuries and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the site heavily, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a certain man in his sleep:
he experienced a blackness that looked like burn scars;
and this corrosion began at the bottom of his big toe, spreading all over his foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot with a bandage and it healed;
and long after he had the corrosion on his fingers, and he came to me,
and I applied striking remedies after cleaning the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as long as there was hope of curing the matter; and I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, For the strength of man was feeble; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and healed his hand with ointment, and was cured;
and I have no other remedy to tell you about, if one has need of it.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy area, and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then they rot and burst, and in this state the bowels remain empty, just like vessels; and the skin that is above is as delicate as a thin cloth. and they do not reach the bone or nerve, and such a malady is called 'healed'.
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone deep inside, then it is called a 'fistula'.
and the wound is such that you should cut away all the skin around it, and especially when it is superficial, just like a thin cloth. And do not be concerned about causing damage to the tissue.
If you are worried that the skin will become infected, and the infection is not deep, and the skin is thick with scar tissue, thus the treatment with a cautery:
look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels which are within them stink badly, then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafætida, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix together, cooking in .i. vessel over a fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
then take some of it according to your need, and they mix it in water and honey, and they use it as an enema on the breast, and compress the wound; and let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breasts are deflated and the pain is gone.
and sometimes they are enema with ashes water, when this medicine is not present, you should burn vine wood to make ashes, pour water over it,
then strain the mixture and use it as an enema until the breasts are fully deflated.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, if he is enema with water and honey where there is a little quicklime ground; or you cleanse it with honey and mead, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the bowels move;
and when you have done this and are sure that the breast is clean, if the enema makes them defecate,
and you should apply a soothing ointment made from rose oil and wine; or you can enema with other medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, widen it with a knife a little, and insert a tent made from Egyptian ointment, or basil icon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it only in one place where the enema can enter,
and if the opening that is gushing below is above it, then the wound or lower down where it is. For when the bowels are ruptured, then do not let them be sewed up; and if you cannot close the breast underneath as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the bowels go to the lowest place they can,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you want to, prepare in such a way: that the bow runs leichtly down, and let nothing of the bow; and take consolatory medicines to put on the breast,
and are covered by a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press firmly on the opening of the breast a little larger than the first, then there is ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening of the breast to ease the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth for several days at a time;
and that which is over the breast, removed often to remove the bow, and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises above the breast, if you know that the breast is open, and approaches the saints;
then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast flows yellow bile after many days, know that the breast does not open. And if subtle poisons spread after a long time, do not despair of health,
because health approaches. For there are people in whom the poison moves slowly through their body, and others who it affects quickly;
and if a swollen and indigestible lump appears on the breast after many days, you can be sure that the lump will not burst.
And if the breast is slow to burst and is distant, then apply medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as it defines omentum, because there is a large part of vitriol in it, and it is the last medicine;
take omentum, and prepare it with rose oil, and the vinegar of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it; and with the same mixture, thicken honey. when omentum is not available,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it is over the fire; and then glue a cloth, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer a long aristolache, and roots of celandine, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
and roots of celandine, which is like flour of wheat and centaury; and in the use of simples or of compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes impressions in the bones, or in hard tissues, or in soft tissues; if it is a wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
of an abscess of the nail
Panaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand, or the foot, or occasionally occurs in other places;
and when it becomes infected, and one takes no care, then there comes a bad abscess, and they decay and rot away until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they decay entirely;
it comes to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is swollen and red.
When you treat it as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess growth from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. Cauteries are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail pushes the flesh in, and starts to poke through, and the bleeding, then you must put the fire under the nail so that it doesn't push against the flesh, and press it up gently and gently, and put on top of the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove it all.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and throw it away, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decaying, pull it out with a pair of forceps as previously described, then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is infected and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first; then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally,
and be careful not to cut into the flesh underneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, place something to soothe it.
The teeth that grow in the mouths of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes a tooth,
and some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some part of the fingers. Those which originate in any finger do not move, and those that originate at the joint of the finger sometimes move;
the size of the fleshy one is slight in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spathe.
He who is born in the root of the joint, if he is painful to cure, hold him tightly.
For one who is born at the tip of the tailbone, you must first round off the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth, then cure it until it is healed.
Judgments that come to both together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burn from fire, or similar things.
Then you should set that joint, so that the bones heal according to their natural forms. Then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you could place them between two thin pieces of wood, until the joint is healed, as it should be.
If sudamen comes to any of his hands with the palm, he catches it as appropriate.
Of the poor
Wounds are large, enveloped, and filled with melancholy superfluities, which come in various parts of the body;
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than in others.
Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purgative of collyrium, and then heal it with basil.
The treatment of wounds is according to two methods: one is to apply a cautery, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
The incision is made in this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then pull the leg of the patient from above the thigh to just below the knee; then open the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide cut,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat meat mixed with black vinegar;
and recommence the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which hurts the patient.
The raising of the leg is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then apply the hot compress directly to the vein from the top of the knee down to the ankle, or in the area below the ankle;
then open the skin at the base of the nail, and burn the vein on both sides until it is exposed when one feels it.
and one sees it red and black; and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white string.
then push the needle underneath, so that it is raised from the skin, and then it can be easily removed at the base of the nail,
then pierce the skin in another location, about two fingers away; then burn the skin over the vein until it is exposed, then move it to the arm, as you have done, and then to another hook, as you did before;
then take another turn, or several if needed, then lift it, and tie it around the toe of the foot,
then pull and lift it until the second turn, then release it from turn to turn until it is completely loose, then tie it off.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with two strands of strong thread, and you draw it out, and you push it under .i. hair, and you turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it doesn't catch, because if it catches, then one cannot pull it or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have drawn it out completely, then place on the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is bent and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said, if you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to open a vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it opens the vein without cutting.
It has a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and thus is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
It may also appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that arise under the skin,
just as snakes and worms do inside the body, between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's onset are that a great inflammation comes in the leg,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. then the location changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like a plant's root.
When the wound is opened, you must wrap it with a piece of linen from one and a half to two inches wide, and tie it tightly,
and let the linen hang down to the leg, and every time that it comes out of place, wrap around it with the linen again, and tie the knot. If it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap around with what remains, but do not cover the root at all until it is completely out. for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness.
for this reason it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body.
and sometimes this vein is treated from five to ten fingers' breadth long, and one man came to me whose vein had grown ten fingers' breadth long; and when you cover it, it goes into a vein or veinlet, and pierces right through to the bottom,
so that everything comes out; and empty the matter within, and administer medicines in the area for several days, then cure it as with an abscess.
And sometimes there is bleeding from this vein, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and there is much pus and bleeding; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "bovine disease" in our land because it often occurs in oxen.
and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and the flesh, traveling throughout the body, going up and down. The patient feels pain wherever the worm goes, as it dislodges the skin where it travels, causing the skin to jump.
It is accompanied by various fluids like pus, blood, and other fluids, similar to that found in warts, tumors, and various types of worms.
and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled, one cannot help but wonder how it feels when it pierces:
therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong thread, tightly bound,
then grab above and pull outward, and if the worm is embedded deep in the flesh, and you do not remove it, cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then grab under it and pull outward;
and it is necessary to use the patient's body cleansing with solutive medicines for the bad humors.
and to avoid meat that causes putrefaction.
About pain caused by flatulence: This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then it moves from one limb to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, quicker than anything, as lively as silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departs from that spot, and settles in the shoulder
and then a little while later it runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw her.
I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in such a way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many who wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because women had dry bodies and exposed veins; and because this wind is forced to appear;
and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and swollen veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels pain, if it appears to you as we have said, take hold of it above and below firmly, and then press until the windiness forced out. and cauterize the site; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
if the treatment of those who drive out wind, as with foul pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the place in the body where they land.
The diversity of their points is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth; and those who have .ij. angles, and those who have tongues, and those with pieces; and that which breaks in any member, breaks according to two ways: or in a principal member, it breaks,
such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the sign of death which I will tell you about below appears: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many cases. And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not firmly lodged, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of a skull fracture when the arrow pierces the bone and hits the brain, and the pus comes out from above the skull, are when there is cutting and bleeding and swelling and redness all over, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without a nose or ears; and perhaps loses his speech and voice; and the wound weeps white moisture resembling pus, and also drips like blood;
And if these signs appear, then cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced into a hard object, not bleeding. and occasionally the patient becomes mute like the poultry, and their blood runs cold, and they become cold and break out in a cold sweat, and experience syncope: you will know without a doubt that death has come.
And the sign of an arrow wound that pierces the lung is that without pain foam comes from the mouth, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and they sigh deeply and seek the cold air.
And if the arrow pierces into the covering of the foot, it is located between the small ribs; and they spit up a lot of phlegm and experience great pain and sighing; and all their limbs move from the shoulders.
And if an arrow hits the gut, by chance something indigestible might escape from the wound.
And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the intestine but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow hits the bladder and urine escapes and comes out, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is lethal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you do likewise.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow hit him in the jaw, at the root of the teeth: I tried it, and drew it out from under the ear lobe, and he was healed without pain.
And I treated an arrow that hit him in the eye socket, under the eyelid: and the arrow was withdrawn, but its tip remained pointing towards the forest. and the arrow was large, from a Turkish bow, with a very light shaft without ears; the king was unharmed and no ill happened to him.
And he shot an arrow at a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I cut off the beards, and slenderized it until I shot it, and the Christian was unharmed.
And I treated a man who had an arrow stuck in his back or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, and removed it entirely, without any ill effects.
And if you see a man with an arrow that has pierced his back and the wound is closed over:
and left the arrow inside him, and did not change his natural dispositions, nor found harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man who was shot in the face with an arrow and the wound was sewn up;
and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
And drew an arrow at a prince of the king's house who had an enemy in his eye, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was fully drawn
I was called to the wound after it had been healed for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I wanted to treat it with a subtle poultice, and I didn't feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain underneath his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I applied a cooling and digestive plaster to the area, because the ears were swollen; and I saw the tip of the arrow.
and I saw the tip of the arrow. I applied the ointment many times, and re-opened the wound directly, and the patient remained ill for a long time.
as long as he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so. I applied medicine to the wound many times, until it was open,
and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was sticking out at the site; then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it healed well within four months,
then the wound opened so that I could pry it open with tweezers, and it would not close again;
therefore I did not cease to treat and devise remedies with tools, until one day I took them with well-made tweezers, According to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, as I have described it, and restored the wound.
And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was entirely cured.
Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot understand everything;
but wise masters consider well very few things, and those which are present to them and lacking; they find new remedies, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the members where they are lodged according to two methods: or by the place where they enter, or elsewhere;
and that which suddenly exits through the place it enters is an arrow entering into their flesh, and suddenly exits sometimes now.
And if it does not exit immediately, let them leave it as long as the flesh is broken around it, and let the exit be relieved.
And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot exit, then let them leave it thus for some days, and move it every day.
and then it pops out; if not, pierce around with a thin stick until the surrounding area is stretched, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deeply within the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the body; and if you feel it, then draw it to an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut as deeply as you can to open up the wound; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs holding it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs holding it in place, if you remove the nail which is stuck in it with two parts of the nail that you can reach then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it out;
then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow as you will then have to pull it out with more force.
And if you cannot do this in one go, then leave it until the skin around it becomes toughened, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood causes a contrary effect, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter.
and be wary of cutting the nerve and opening the vein, and use your skill to pull out the arrow without danger.
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient in the same position as when the arrow hit them. for that is the best help you can give them; and if you cannot, then put them according to what the signs show you.
Arrows which have come from elsewhere, where there is an opening through the skin or the flesh is swollen in that spot so it can be seen or felt obviously:
Cut on top then, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it won't come out now, cut again later.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
And if it can't come out, then leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out;
and if the arrow is in the shoulder, it will reach all the way to the shoulder;
and if the arrow is short, and you want to administer a bandage, then he should administer a bandage with a needle so that the tip of the arrow enters into the windpipe of the instrument; and then pull out,
and if the arrow is lodged, then he should administer an instrument with a pointed end to push it out and ease its extraction.
And if the arrow has touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow hits in the foot or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut over it, then cut it out;
and beware of cutting into the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then stitch the wound, if need be; and the treatment until it heals.
The shape of tweezers used to treat arrow wounds is similar to an owl's beak; here is their shape:
There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
common body veins Veins from which one bleeds are .xxxi., of which there are xvi. in the head,
there are two points located after the ears, which are called the "two ears of wheat"; and the two arteries that are visible in each temple; and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "spirits"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips on the face, and they are called "augerich". and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
the one is cephalic, and it is from the left side; and people call it the "wound of the head". and the middle one is called the "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and people call it the "wound of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and people call it the  "wound of the belly", and it is above the bladder, and is the one that is healed, which opens clearly above the scrotum.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches:
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the armpit on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are .3 veins underneath them.
The bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient cataracts and with emigration; and the quality of the bleed, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the bleed, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a wrench, until they appear behind the ears, in two places, dependent from the head; place them on your palm and where you feel the pulse underneath, press in;
then take the lance, insert it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut through both skin and vein well two times with the lance, and let the blood out until you see it;
then he pulls and binds it, until it is healed;
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples, which is good for old migraines, and for sore eyes and blindness, and for the body of tears with pain;
and the qualities of the surgeon if he is as I say: and that the patient holds his neck steady, so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel around your anus, and then sign with your hand;
then press the vein near the top of your penis with your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and open the vein at the top, and the cup, as you have done in .xii. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
and then ligature it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction in the beginning of this book.
The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as good for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the qualities such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a 'pricker', whose form is as follows:
and place the point over the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you wish. then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie off the vein until it is healthy and sometimes use a broad flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too hot; and the sick person is crooked, for the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
The healing of the two veins that are in two arms helps themselves, and tetanus, and redness, and a squint in the eye, and diseases of the face;
and the nature of their healing is that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligature, as mentioned above;
then heal it, and let the healing be through the transverse vein, a little from the long vein a little wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then draw blood from it, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein in the nose is useful for migraines, and for seizures, and for facial illnesses, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and likewise when it is old;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient stretches his neck, then pulls his nose to the left hand, Take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
The healing of the two testicles helps with straining of the groin, and at the beginning of masturbation, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with ulcers, and with herpes, and with stomachaches;
and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient should hold his neck still under either side, as we have said; and the master should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a chair,
then heal the vein of the arm, then draw blood in a tempered manner, as much as is necessary;
then do another one in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently compress the veins. so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
About bleeding from the lips: Bleeding from the veins of the lips helps with sores in the mouth and gum corruption and lip splits and toothaches.
And the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them because they are black, and because around them there are fine black veins: therefore grasp one and the other, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt,
therefore grasp one and the other, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt, take the thickest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
Of bleeding under the tongue: Bleeding from the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is good for tightness in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient holds his hands out in front of the sun, and touches the tongue, and looks under each cheek for a black vein;
Clean both of them, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
either with a very thin mirtin flame, or an olive-shaped sharp instrument, which is called "anesil". They are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins. The shape of the mortar is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
And it is necessary to open veins that are smooth and filled with dark blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped mortar:
and it is more pointed and refined, and is used for bleeding subtle veins, where there is thin and yellow blood.
The vein of the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and the surgeon should bleed it, and be wary of the artery that is underneath. And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding ensues, then it must be stanched, as I have said; and the flame should not be seized, but cut off as if it were a branch.
And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another. Or, if you want to use a vein in his arm, open the vein in the arm: it will open clearly; and apply the cupping glass to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the location for bleeding, you must stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the pulse; then sign the area with the pointer finger, then tie the arm, and press the vein with a flame to anesthetize it;
and beware of piercing an artery when you see the area swell; avoid that.
And if you see it bulge upward like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood: hurry, then place your finger over it firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens.
Let the arm be tied, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him remain quiet, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is staunched, and he vomits, and the medicine is not present, then press on the artery until it is closed, and stop the flow of blood.
And take a piece of raw hide, cut it in half, and tie the wound tightly with one half until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then stanch it with a powder that stops bleeding, as we have said.
and the bandages are not wrapped tightly in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The bleeding of a vein in the middle, if it draws blood from the head above and from the body below, this is because it is composed of basil and Cephalic, as we have said;
and the bleed should be applied to the nerve underneath, and if it pricks too much, and it finds the nerve, and it swells and the saint is grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens in many places, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you should heal it with the instrument gently; and cut the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it through the long one.
The healing of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to cauterize them with the flame of an olive branch or a myrtle twig, for that is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and if one misses the first time, one should try again. and by chance, some men's veins swell up, if one misses the first time, but it does not hurt them. The quality of the cautery depends on your skill.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health.
and to prevent future illnesses; and bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: these are the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of the morning, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
and one should bleed him on the first day or the third, after two or three days.
The bleeding which is administered for illnesses does not have a specific time, but rather when there is need, at any hour and at all times.
and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus before the fourth month up to the seventh month. Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when one wishes to bleed themselves, in whatever manner, they should first cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema. if they have retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful, excess matter from the intestines to the principal members;
one must not bleed those who are bloated with meat, nor the drunk, so long as their condition persists, nor the sickly;
and one must bleed with caution after a colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual activity, as well as due to exertion, waking, fasting, or any other cause, either from the arms or legs;
then subtly the humors, if the blood is thick, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter into a bath, if nothing else weakens him, to sutilize the blood,
and heal the vein of the foot around the third, as we have said;
and keep that day from work and pointing and lust and similar things;
and lies down and joins his arms, and the bandages are placed higher than the person being bandaged, and he rubs his arm two or three times,
then tightens the bandage above the elbow, for if it is too loose or too tight, he cannot move his arm;
and then rubs the area around the hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moistens the bandages with a little old oil, then puts his finger from his left hand onto the vein under the elbow where he wants to bandage, that the vein does not burst upon striking. For there are veins which flow like cords in the body, and some that are filled with wind, so that when one applies fire to it, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with some people;
and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the surgeons to be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down at the same spot or above, if the area isn't swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him be for one or two days, and don't bind his arm. Perhaps warm abscesses will form; do not enter the bath, then restart bleeding if it pleases her;
and if the vein is small, cut it short and firmly, and you doubt that it won't let out as much blood as you want, then pierce that same vein directly with a flame.
and work on it a little gently so that the skin is not swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little lamb's wool saturated in oil on it, because the oil lightens the body of blood, and in this place the lamb's wool that has been used becomes medicine.
and in this way administer the oil in every bleeding vein that you treat to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing happens with triacle and bowe, when it is applied to the area; the blood and pus are drawn out when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not cleaned out more than once or the opening of the vein is small, take an sponge moistened in warm water and salt, place it over the site, and hold it there for an hour.
You should do this after the blood has drained from the vein. If it remains there for several days and a black or green color appears, this is not harmful. And if you see any swelling, apply an ointment of aloe or myrrh mixed with rosewater, balsam, or similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the exit of the vein: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of your hand, then is that appearance evil. Therefore beware that you do not place anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it pierces through an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and the flames be wide.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they must bleed little and often, and it behoves to bleed him by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of bleeding is safe from bloodletting and cutting of nerves, and is better than bleeding long or wide.
And for one whose body needs bleeding, one should give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if he is scorched, then draw out blood four or five times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, he should eat before bleeding wet bread in a syrup of mace, or in a syrup of aromatic honey with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during bleeding, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he inhales the scent of warm meat broth and subtle, fragrant syrup.
and use the other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for the opening of a vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by a great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And he who wishes to open his arm after the first bleeding, and has strong pulse, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere, should do so on the second or third day.
For there is a great deal of blood within the body which has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore one should draw out a large quantity and widen the vein until it bleeds freely. Then you should know all about bleeding, and put your hand on the pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not come from the vein. and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
and you should not press firmly on a vein when opening it for the second time, if the incision is closed and bleeding has stopped. And if it is bent, do not extend the arm suddenly, because that would be harmful.
but let it heal the second time; or you may touch it with the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood at the incision melts and comes out, and put on top .i. little of salt dissolved in water, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it at all until the abscess is drained.
And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is compound.
And the manner of healing is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the swelling turns red.
Then let him be bandaged lightly so that the vein is visible, neither too tightly nor too loosely;
and let the opening be wide enough, and let him be healed near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is warmer in winter than in summer.
and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The bleeding of the right hand vein is good for all diseases of the liver, and here is the method:
Press the hand, and put it in warm water until the vein swells, as one can see; and if it bleeds across, and you press it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath, completely stripped of flesh.
then put your hand in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to stop it, and do this for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
The medicine for gout is good for all diseases underneath the body. such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the knees, hips, and legs, and similar diseases.
And its qualities are such that the patient should put his foot in warm water, and rub the vein until it bursts, and if the vein is at the ankle, and further up the foot there are many veins;
then cut it off at the shank, or at the ankle, whichever is easier.
And if you cut it off at the foot, then guard against the nerves underneath, and cut it through horizontally as well as vertically; and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
And if it needs to be cut the first time, then do it again the second time above a little, for the place is salty; do not hesitate to cut the nerve, as we have said, and similarly do the same with the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation indicates the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its pulsation is such that the patient should twist four times in either direction,
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then pulse in all ways that you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cut it, for the wound will heal, and she has been very relieved by many people.
and it is better that you cut it, for the wound will heal, and she has been very relieved by many people. And if you do not treat it, any cut on the side of the foot that is open, towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves;
and make the blood flow until you see it, and then loosen the bandage, and place cotton on it and bind it tightly; it is now healed.
Of wound bleeding
Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this bloodletting without striking is also done in two ways: either with all fire, or without fire;
and two others on each side of the neck, and the ventouse under the chin; and the ventouse on the two shoulders; and the ventouse above the hips; and the ventouses in the two arms; and the ventouses in the two legs; and the ventouses at the two ankles; and the ventosion does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and for this reason it weakens none at all, just as one does with bleeding from a vein; and it must not be administered, neither with all fire nor with any heat, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if, because of necessity or habit, one must bleed, then we shall administer it every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in each season.
For there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and if they experience blockage and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who spit up blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and vomit blood; and if they dream, see through the night blood, and suffer from fainting and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
The bleeding of the nose is useful for headaches that originate in the head and affect the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body;
and this venting is in place of bleeding from the head,
and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their head.
And those who recover from it often become oblate, and for this reason one should place the cupping glass a little lower down in case of oblateness.
The ventouse on the neck is located where the brain meets the skull, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the feet: and for splitting of the gullet, and for hernia, and for retention;
and one should not push it too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it causes oblateness or stomach ache and heartache.
Winding pains around the .12 ribs of the neck cause headache and blindness, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of bleeding basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express their hand in placing it, so that they do not press the artery and come rushing blood.
Winding pains below the chin cause mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Winding pains in the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, because the area is naked of flesh and underneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; it should be large, made of copper, and well-suctioning; and if it were thin, it could break and cause large wounds.
The leg cupping glasses heal very effectively, for they draw blood from the entire body and are good for old pains in the hips, and the joints of the loins, and the bladder, and draw out humours; and are placed over the two sciatic nerves, and over the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring fainting in various conditions.
The method for applying the cupping glass is that you place it first empty, and suck gently, and press firmly, and move equally, and do not stop doing so until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have very thin skin and clear pores; therefore one must strike only once, and one must make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw little by little, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est gros et espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois, et la quarte.
And if we want a lot of blood, we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the tip is so that the heart is pierced suddenly,
and it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin, and who have tight pores, that you grease the suction cup openings with heating and dissolving oil: if it is for a wound, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is for an eye problem, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or of fennel, and similar oils.
And if the person being healed has tender flesh with large pores, then no oil should be used,
but afterwards they should wash with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large tumors rise from old wine, or from dried water, or from the infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things.
and should not be bled by cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and should not sleep after being bled,
and it is necessary for him to fast when he is to be bled and when he has been bled. And guard against the patient being colic-prone, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; if they should eat cool things, such as sour apples, endive, lettuce, garlic, and similar items.
and drink buttermilk, and castor oil, and moist meats.
And those with a cool complexion should eat honey syrup, and mild, aged wine, and drink buttermilk, and castor oil, and eat small birds and squabs;
and on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than he eats;
and one must give some people treacle or musk before or after venting, to strengthen the main members; and thin out the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
The leeches that are used without bleeding are those that are used on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the stone, and on the belly, and the groin, and the hips, because these members cannot bear to be bled on the eyes,
and it is not done except to draw blood from one member to another, as we place cups on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity from a limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and chest to reduce swelling in a limb;
and it alleviates pain, when there is gangrene or a stone, and by its attractive power it removes the gangrene, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and it does the same when placed over the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty just to draw out; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the glass with hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the fire cupping instrument is as follows:
And it has a diameter of two inches and a half, and it has on the side around the middle a small hole, as large as to push through an awl,
and is made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and has a hook bent out of iron or steel, to grip a candle
and some are large and some small depending on the illnesses and age of those who take them;
because the ventouses of children are different from adults, and of the thin than the fat.
And one should thus place this ventouse on the member:
take the candle of wax or .i. liniment, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod which is inside the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the body, and your fingers should be on the hole that we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapors will go in and then one removes the suction cup;
and they take the liniment as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
Therefore, in the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, and all acute diseases, has no spout nor hole, and is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed only on the affected member;
and this is its form:
Leeches are not used except in members where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as skin or nerve, and other similar places;
and the quality of its use is such that when you find sores that are in clean, still water without putrefaction, you should take them.
and place one leech in clean water, until they are familiar and do not struggle. Then cleanse the wound with a vein-opening treatment and leeches, then rub the affected member until it turns red, and apply the leeches.
And when they are swollen and start to suck, if there is a place where a leech can be placed, put one there, for this helps a great deal.
If not, then it raises the area of pain, then with water, very well, and then he sprinkles it.
And if the place heals too quickly after the bite of a snake, he wets a linen cloth in cold water and places it until the swelling is reduced;
And if the bites are multiple, he places powdered vitriol or galena and similar things until it is reduced;
Or you place half peeled peas on the area, leaving them until they stick to the area, and it will stop bleeding immediately;
and if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area of fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle so that some blood emerges, and then place them on top, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach;
and when you see that they are excreting, then dust them with a little powdered aloes and salt, or ashes, and they will suck strongly now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the wise men of old did not speak of this chapter in their books, nor read any letters about it;
and for this reason, the knowledge of it is strange in our land, for I never found any good [knowledge] of it;
and I know nothing of it except through the study of ancient books, in which I have labored until I have mastered their wisdom, and through experimentation, and through the habits of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book about the matters contained within, and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and dwells upon truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or break occurs in anyone, you should hurry to treat the patient from both sides with cauterization, if there is no impediment, such as weakness of body, or pregnancy, or old age:
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and game and kid meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then let the patient return to his first treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig's belly, offal, freshwater fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things. Because with more swelling, the break will heal faster.
And know that broken bones of the elderly and the frail cannot heal well or unite according to their nature due to the dryness of their members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
but have no care, reset it on the broken bone .i. large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as he forces it so that it is as it was before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this one must eat lots of meat, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures. Because there is a fracture which goes towards the root, and another in sharpening, as with the tip of a writing quill.
Because there is a fracture which goes towards the root, and another in sharpening, as with the tip of a writing quill. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break throughout a small split.
And in each way, it has its own remedy and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is due to twisting, and becomes apparent by swelling, and makes a noise when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no crookedness nor swelling, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
but there may be crookedness, or fissure, or a small fracture. You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are described below, and then hold it steady with a gentle grip.
And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and where the two parts are disjoined, they must now be put back in line with each other so that the abscesses heal properly.
and if hot abscesses arise, let him leave them for a day until the abscesses are soothed; then reset it evenly as you can lightly and gently, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that one where there are wounds; then release it, as appropriate afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, it is split into .2 parts, if it is in the hand or foot, or in your hand if it is a small member, or with .2 strings, or with one string and your hand;
and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, they are reset by all means in their places as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Feel it with your hand to see if it is not in the right position; then adjust it properly and do not strain or press too hard as those do who cause hot abscesses and contraction of the limb through their treatment, as we have seen many times.
And when the bone is in place, then instruct the patient to be careful not to move it, whether awake or asleep, turning over in bed, or in any other way. and make sure that the limb is secure so that there is no pain. For when he feels no pain at all, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain at all, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and beware that it be set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I have told you.
Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.Les quels conviennent a l’un et ne conviennent pas a l’autrier;
For there are small limbs, like arms and fingers and the like: so one must wrap them in soft, thin linen.
and those that are large, like thighs and legs: these must be wrapped with wide, strong linen, for the wide linen encloses the entire large limb, and it compresses all parts evenly so that there is no pressure.
then wind around it light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little at every turn of the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less so that the dislocation is drawn out a little.
and soften the bandage little by little as you apply it to most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap around again directly over the dislocated area.
then go to the underside of the fracture, and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first hour above.
then place between the ligatures, pieces of linen or bandages, so that it is all even; then bind it all tightly with a bandage above, and then put your splints in well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot to relieve the abscess, and to reduce the swelling; leave it like that for a few days.
Then hold over your splints, and they should be made from half a length of cane resined, or from wood that is used for making chisels, or from palm tree branches, and they should be shaped like this:
but it is necessary for the star that one places on the break to be a little larger and broader than the others;
and as long as it is convenient for the member, whether small or large;
then tighten around the stars just as you did at first, then tie it tightly, just as you did before on the break;
the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, and made of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their knots with linen threads that are twisted unevenly, and this is a great error, for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have between each eye less than two threads' thickness.
And if the patient is raw under the eyes of the stars after the straining in their healthy state, then place underneath them lint or woolen rags so that it does not blister.
When the wound is with a fracture and the skin is broken, I will describe its treatment below.Car li grant maladous que l’on dit estre de la piere ne sont pas touz si de la piere; mes de la briseure qui adont la piere, et del chié qui de la briseure adont la plaie; si est li granz maux, et la grant piere ne se peut guérir si l’on n’estranche la piere.
And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all broken limbs on the first day.Car li maux adont les membres par la briseure, et la piere que adont la plaie, il covient li premier jor estraindre li maux de la piere, et le second jor esguarer li maux del chié; car il ne doit guérir li maux de la piere li premier jor, mes li autrez joures. Because when the member is great, it should not be put in a splint for more than five or seven days, or more according to the security of the hot abscess;
and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twisting: you take flour that is held on the walls of the mill, and confit it with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 grains of barley and ladani and ennule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 grains; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grains; alechil 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Another way of plaster that is useful for twisting: take mastic and viscum album, each 10 grains; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grains; acacia 6 grains; Armenian bole 10 grains, and grind well, and confit with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Another method of poultice for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to treat fractures: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area. These poultices do not promote healing, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and alleviating pain.
Another method of poultice that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dead nettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of poultice for healing broken bones and reducing swelling from an abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; crush and cook in wine. If the patient is feverish, cook in coriander water or water.
Another method of stronger poultice when a tough abscess comes to the healing of the member. Take marshmallow root, flax seed, borage, melilot, and cow's foot, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; crush and cook in salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to heal it other than a ointment made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to heal, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another type of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and grind them up, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not loosen it by hand for several days:
And if pain or itching comes in the area, or swelling, lack of rest, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and wipe off the area until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on clean linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up in a bandage until you are sure there is no hot abscess.
And soothe the inflammation of the member, and relieve the pain, then restart the gentle binding, and a little ointment, and do not bind it so tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that there is heat and redness and pain and swelling still remaining in the body, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.Et se tu vois que li membre est sane et apaisie, si le tiens en repos et en legier cheis, et ne le deffait mie tant qu’il ne soit tout sanz dolor; et tu tiens li membre ou il doit estre, si com tu avies fait premierement.
And if the limb does not improve with what we have said, do not remove the splint for three, four, five, or seven days, and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on how well the fracture is healing and how close the bone is to the skin.
then keep it restrained more than before, and the meat will grow larger, as I have said before. And if you see the area drier than it should be, know that no healing can take place there. Soak the area in warm water when you remove the splint, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little each time.
Through this work, the limb will heal, and gently shorten what the foolish wound has made long; this is evil, and it is a cowardly work, and I see nothing good in it except to let it rest and work on it properly.
of various ways of breaking There are many types of fractures, with diverse appearances, and the causes are distinct.
There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the sinus cavity underneath the bone, as with an axe or a staff; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Or the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures are great or small.
And if there is concussion accompanied by swelling, or fracture, or a blow from a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar.
And if there is a fracture penetrating to the membrane just under the bone, or on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as thinly as a hair, and the fracture is small, then this type of fracture is called 'capillare'.
And if the wound is made by being hit with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and it causes the bone to break and enter inside, and the location is splintered like how blacksmiths split iron on an anvil; in this case, the stone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones at their head, like the skull of a child;
and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged, as with bones; I will speak about them in their place.
And we should know all types of fractures through examination, and through the corrupt flesh that is on top of it.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one uncovers the bone and rubs it gently, then the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to any bad signs of illness, and if you see any harmful incidents, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, seizures, feverish shivering, eyes bulging and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see any shocking incidents and you expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the patient first comes to you and it is winter, then you should remove the splint before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in the spring, then you should hasten to remove the splint before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone does not rot and cause the incidents we have described.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and it is that you grip the head of the wounded man, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and over the wound more gently than you can,
and if blood flows out when uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then help as it is suitable, and it is that you fill the wound with moist bandages in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and there is no more blood flow; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to 2 methods of work: one method is that you cut with a sharp knife directly in front, and this is the shape:
And then put another cut larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse tools, some narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you administer tools with chisels, not deeper than to penetrate through the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a rim or .i. circle, which does not let the point pass through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all skulls; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of chisels:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to put .i. chisel on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel elsewhere a little later, and thus do all around, then cope with the incisions the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this most subtly and gently, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have, such as tweezers, pincers; and beware of touching the brain or the membrane.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is necessary to cut away the membrane which is left on the bone with some instrument like an incision, but it must be more flexible and sharper than the other incision;
and if it remains in the small bones or any scales, then gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and his words are as follows: First, you must expose a part of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is exposed, place under the head of this lens-shaped instrument, of which this is the shape:
And do not cut from one side, but the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet upon it, so that you slightly chip away at the bone all around, taking care to avoid the membrane below;
if it is dislocated to the bone, then the bone should be put back into place gently, for one puts the bone back into place without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a very thin razor, of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply the most suitable one in each place, according to the action and the shape of the fracture.
Take first a large razor, and then a thinner one, and do not cease doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other hairline fractures and delicate breaks, you should apply treatment according to their nature; and this is something that is not laid out for one who has dedicated his study to this art.
And if the ulcer is exposed, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound. Then take another double-folded cloth in two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as you can so that you do not put any pressure on the ulcer. Then apply a bandage over it, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold it in place.
Let it remain like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed. Then remove the bandage and treat the wound with medications such as lily roots, and flour made from beans, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things. Make a powder from these ingredients and apply it to the wound, then administer additional medications without biting the area;
and ensure that the wound is clean and free of any foreign objects, as when a bandage is applied over the brain's membrane, it can become irritated and inflamed, causing great harm to the patient. When something biting is placed on the ulcer and then covered, it will cause irritation from above.
Take care then, if no ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, for it is certain without doubt.
And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that one has applied, since such power it has, then you must take some honey and three parts rose oil and mix it into a paste with a cloth, and place it on the ulcer; then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw above are broken, either by themselves or together, for they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you must stick your little finger or needle into the wound and place the break inside your index finger, and pull it out with force, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape. and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nail, and cannot come to the place of the finger, then you must put it equally at the top of a piece of wood, rather thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and be quick to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then attach to the head of the tent made of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you attach another from another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
And some say that one should soak the tents in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be soaked in egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and wrap it in a silk cloth, and keep the fracture still, and the patient breathes through it; do as you like.
And if painful abscesses come in the nose while you are working on it, then apply cerot or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyer's alkanet.
And if they do not come, then apply a plaster with force, made from flour of salsify, and powdered incense, confited with egg white, then apply it gently on swabs, without binding the nose.
And if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound and stop the bleeding with healing, soothing plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents and apply a pack of plasters, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no wound in evidence, and only the joint is dislocated without fracture, and not broken in two, so that it is bent inside, one can perceive this easily.
If the dislocation is on the right side, you should insert your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left side, insert the right index finger and gently push the joint back into place with the other hand, keeping it even.
And if the dislocation of the jaw is dislocated to one side, one should administer an extension of two parts, so that it becomes even.
And if there is movement in the teeth, or a fracture, then bind them with a gold or silver wire, or silk; then apply cerate to the broken mandible, and place a double drape over it; and place a large, well-made splint, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then put it back into place again; and apply ointment over it, made of powdered millstone with egg white or flour, after you have removed the cerate; and place a thin layer of lamb's wool over the ointment, and if the jaw is not healing, and its condition remains unchanged, leave it as long as necessary until it heals, sometimes within three weeks.
And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it to see if any piece of bone has been displaced; then reset it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains inside, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is healed.
of the armpit The armpit may break in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it may be broken and displaced in two places with pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or it may be broken with a wound.
And the work is when there is no wound in the fracture, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken collarbone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break equal in your hands, so that it has neither appearance nor swelling.
And if you need to extend more, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round piece of cloth, or of woolen cloth, and let it be thick according to your need; and they lift and loosen the collarbone, and hold the cloth in your hand, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is deeply embedded, then the patient should lie on his back, and put under the shoulder a small pillow, and the ministers press the shoulder down, until the bone of the collarbone is raised up.
And then grasp the break with your hands, and if you find it split, then you must split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then use this instrument to ward off the skin:
it resembles a spoon, and is not flat, and should be as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it has two ends, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, as is the path of the wound that you made when treating the bones;
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt a hot abscess, then pack the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, then moisten a piece of linen in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and place it over the wound.
The splitting of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is that you place on the bone a poultice made from milldust and egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a splint under the shoulder, if necessary. then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth on cotton pads and anoint it; then take a thin steel rod three fingers in width and length, and wind it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the rod on the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sore armpit; and reset it in each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place properly, and you see clearly that the rod does not move on top of the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature loosens, restrain it again;
and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder; then loosen the fracture of the collarbone by raising the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if no evil accident occurs, until twenty days have passed;
then renew the anointing if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave him like this until he is healed; and she is healed at most in twenty-eight days, and less with some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder dislocates or widens in its socket, and it is not set right except by touch; then set it according to the pattern of the dislocation, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then place ground flour from a mill with egg white, and light bandages, and place on top a double piece of cloth; then place on top a large and thin board, one hand’s breadth wider than the shoulder, and if underneath the board there is any swelling on the shoulder, then use that swelling to pad the board evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it softens, bind it again, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, then unbind him, and be sure, for it is not a bone that can be set easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, then cut it off, and the bone, and do as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe the hot abscess.Et se l’os tent desoz lou keur, et non pas avant, si fent de la maniere que nos avon dit; et se li espaule ne puet estre restoures, si covient li faire une chire ou une fente en l’espaule selonc la brisure, et le mettre dedens, et puis le brancher selonc la forme naturale, et le brancher fermement, et le deslie; et se li espaule fuert plus largement del keur qu’il ne devoit estre, si covient li faire une chire en l’espaule adons de la fente, si que li espaule siet igalment, et li faire brancher fermement, et le deslie; car il ne pouet estre restouree.
of the dislocation of the foot
The thigh is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it more often breaks at the top. And when it is broken in the middle, it tilts downward, and the patient experiences great pain, and there is a lack of movement, and he feels cold all over, and may vomit blood, and the hair turns grey in the broken bone, and he feels great discomfort.
And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together, and bring the ribs closer together with his hands, and carefully adjust the bone to its proper position; then apply plasters and poultices over the fracture site using a delicate salt or some other lightweight substance, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and re-wrap the ligament around the back, and tighten it gently, and check every hour if it has softened, and if so, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, then do so quickly, loosen the ligament, remove the plaster, and treat according to the nature of the condition; then re-apply the plaster and tighten until healed.
[treatment for a broken rib]
Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick part near the back, and in the front near the chest, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
And the restoration is such that you put the fracture in its proper place, just as it should be. And then apply the plaster and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pricks the lung; and it also causes shortness of breath and vomiting a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly in order to push the fracture out.
We do not agree that hot abscesses will not form if they have not formed already. And if he has come, then heal him.
And some say that one should apply cups to the area to draw out fluid, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cups might attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the tissue.
And some say that one should cover the area with warm, moist wool, and place tents between the ribs to create equal pressure all around, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points towards the wound, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and one should place underneath .i. instrument to ward off the siphacus; and then one must cut the bone and pull gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed. And if hot abscesses come, one should place moistened cloths in rose oil on top of the wound; and while treating the area where the abscess should be, one should lie carefully on their side where they should, until it is healed.
from the break in the neck
Sometimes there is a break in the neck bones, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if their hands are soft, swollen, and dead-looking, and if they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in most cases, it is a deadly disposition, and if they can move their hands and feel the pain when you stretch or press on them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be healed if proper care is given.
If a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then examine whether his feet are swollen, and see if the accidents are there which are in the hands, and in the back there is flatulence and urination without wanting it; and when he is laid on his stomach, there is urination without wanting it. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: so do not labor at all in its cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then the case is less serious.
And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, or rose oil, or the yolk of a new egg, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed. And if any bone is exposed, it must be covered with a bandage; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat it with ointment in a bandage, until it is healed; and if there is broken bone, which is called the "bone of the cow", grab your left-hand little finger with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage it on, if you need to; then bind it, and if there is exposed bone, sew it up, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It occasionally happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be some lessening at the top; and they hurt for a long time, and decline towards the sides, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which end of the bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is at the top only, then put it back in place, so that it is in its natural shape.Et s’il est au chief et a li parmain, si met cele qui es a li parmain a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit au chief; et s’il est a li parmain soulement, si met cele qui est al chief a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit a li parmain.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the break is prepared for him.Et s’il est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son costé tant que cele brisure te soit aparillie. And when you have made it even, then apply the ointment, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs, until the color is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if painful abscesses arise, do not touch them until the painful abscesses are soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
of the shoulder dislocation
The acromioclavicular joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. One method is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Tie both ends of the stick with two strings, and bend them upward, and press the patient down on a seat; then pour the broken arm over the stick, so that it comes to rest at the bottom, and press one curve of the stick inwards, and then bend it downward over some heavy object or by the minister extending it downward; then place the broken joint together in alignment with his hands, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his armpit and ties his hand to his neck; then command two ministers, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other below to hold tight from underneath with one string, each pulling their respective ends.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten one string below the fracture and one above it, and extend each minister to their part. And if the fracture is closer to the head of the shoulder, then you should put a light string underneath the base of the shoulder, and another towards the collarbone, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the collarbone, then a light string should be placed lightly without effort, so that the fracture is aligned with its proper position, and then extend equally from both sides, as it should be, and tighten it if necessary.
And if a hot abscess comes, do not drain it until the 7th day, and put soft linen in ash and rose oil on the hot abscess until the hot abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something moves it, or if the bone is moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint 1 digit of space, and let each splint be as wide as it passes the break by 3 digits on each side; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more strongly and less in moving away.
And if you see the setting of the splints and the drainage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it ligature until the 7th day, as we have said; then look at the ligature every 3 days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot come to the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it for three days or more; let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion of equal thickness, and every hour during the day or night, check that the broken member does not move or the ligature become slack; then treat him with medicine and give him the food we mentioned earlier, so that the food is subtle at first and becomes thicker as he starts to recover. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days; then one should loosen it and administer baths and ointment treatments to encourage healing. And if the dislocation is severe and closed up, it should remain loose for one day or two months.
of the break in the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius." The ulna is smaller and located closer to the armpit, while the radius is larger and situated below the small bone. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
When small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easy; but when large bones are broken, the healing is difficult and more painful than when they are broken together. If only a small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
And if it is a large bone, it must be pulled harder; and he should lie on his back, with his hand highest of all, and his small fingers lowest of all, and the patient should be crossed over himself, and a cushion in front of him, so that he suffers no strain. Then the minister should extend his upper arm to the part below his hand, or to one side, and another minister to the other above. And then let the surgeon set it straight according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, let each be placed in its own position, and if any are displaced, hold the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision on the bone as we have said before.
And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; let the cure be taken from there.
And if, at the beginning of the healing, hot abscesses arise, then apply a bandage of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and bind a bandage over it gently, so that the hot abscesses are soothed. Then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with an egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be larger and stronger than the others; and know that there should be six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than anywhere else, and always loosen it a little as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the string, with which he is bound, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. Then examine the limb and the binding after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes on the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest and not be bound tightly. Then restart the binding, and if the ligature has loosened and the bone is displaced, or anything else amiss, then correct it.
And if you perceive that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little and leave it like that for several days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then tighten it again.
And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, do not loosen it until 20 days. or around, then let him hold his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and stirring, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days, or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they come only with great force many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should sit upright and straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the stretched towel, and stretch the minister the broken bones, and put them even ministerially, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then put a cast according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1 linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken plant; then hold it with a long strip of fabric, and let the pad be of woolen cloth as large as the palm of your hand, and hold it, as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the furrow, you should put a pad on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it's the thumb, hold it straight and even as it should be; then hold it with the plant, and if you see, put a small straight pad to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or any other, hold it even, and tie it with the finger next to it; either tie them all together while holding it, which is better, or put a pad on top, as in the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that occur, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The thigh bone is often broken, and one can see this when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is with one ligature above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each ligature to its part equally; and that is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligature should be towards the buttock, and the other ligature below the fracture. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be past the knee, and the extension downward; then the surgeon puts the bone equal to its natural position with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then he applies the poultice and the ligature, unless abscesses come from it.
And if there is a hot abscess, let him calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a way. It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a hard bandage folded in two or three layers, and then tie it tightly, so that only the excess material hangs down. Then, turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the shin, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, so that one end of the thread comes out at the top; then, turn the bandage back over the leg and thigh, and place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to make the binding even, and then begin to tie the binding firmly in three or four places around the fracture. The more you go up from the fracture, the looser the binding should be; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you passed through, and tie the three splints that are on top, and then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach below the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, and then leave it thus, until no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
And if an abscess comes, then loosen it, and treat what comes out of it as we have said many times before; and if there is a bone fragment protruding, then one must remove it if possible; and if not, then one must split the area and draw it out, and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the malady is not cured by this treatment.
And know that the hip is restored within one day, or a little less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
of the joint of the knee
Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or one hole, and it happens in all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels good.
And the restoration is to put it back into place as it was before, with its bones aligned so that they can be set; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, use a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; then treat each accident as appropriate, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
You know that there are two bones in the leg; one is called the "mustel" and the other the "foscile." All fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore their treatment is the same, as are all the operations.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.And if the shinbone is broken, it turns backward. And if the thighbone is broken, it turns outward. And if both are broken, it turns inside out.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it goes underneath. Then bring about extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints equally; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then let the extension be lesser and more gentle; and alleviate according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints which support the leg on both sides, and which are as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap two bands around them, one above and one below, and tie the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg each day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at times there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and of the two bones, and there is only bruising in various positions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones sticking out above one another, then put that foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised up; then press them until they return to their places. Then put the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two smooth sides underneath the belly of the foot, and then bind it tightly to the foot in a suitable manner, and then wrap clothes around it, and other things that you need.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, then set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place underneath the foot that board which I have mentioned, and tighten it appropriately; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on top of each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already said; and treat each case as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When a woman's bone is broken, make her sit up and lean forward, then hold her from behind. Fill the vagina with cotton and insert a stone as big as an egg; then have the woman stand up and loosen her back little by little, whereupon the cotton will come out along with the stone, bringing the broken bone with it. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a straw to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the straw until it is inflated inside; the vagina will then pull the broken bone back into place. Fill it with cotton and leave it for several days until it heals.
And when the bone of the finger is broken in a man or woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to this study with attention and read my book. For in many cases, they indicate the right path to restoration: listen then.
When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it tightly with cloth and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be bled immediately, so that the bleeding we have described bears witness.
And if the wound bleeds, then apply vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then restart reducing the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses appear.
And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, as long as the abscesses are soothed; and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor needs to hold it with three or four fingers, depending on what he needs in each case of broken bone; and it should be smooth and slightly bent, so that it does not fold under pressure on the affected member during your work, and it should be thick at the front and wider from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a "splint," so that the curved shoulder should be placed on the visible top of the bone; and bend it once, as far as it goes back, and make it equal on both sides. And if the fracture is delicate, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you should cut the top of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it firmly.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as an incisor or scissor, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and tiny shards.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black wine vinegar, and apply it clean if it is dirty; do not put cerate or anything else on the wound so that pus and corruption may come; then administer poultices when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound; be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding. And many times the foolish have done this, and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient; and let the binding be softer and more supple than other bindings.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that harm may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap around the wound, instead of poultices, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you put on top to all the way to the wine, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is sewn up and healing.
And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
And if they go many days without healing, and it cannot be reset but keeps dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the dislodged bone fragments that are causing the pain.
And if a fistula or other form of corruption develops, then one must treat it according to what he said in the chapter earlier. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not touch it, for many die from it; but leave it be until it can heal; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come over the weld
We often come after the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the swelling is fresh: have the physician administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; crush one of these substances, or all together, and cook them in wine, egg white, or garlic; apply it to the wound as a poultice, and bind it on tightly for several days; then remove it and start another, until the nodule is removed. Or you can press it hard against a well-shaped piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are such that it removes all inflammation from the limbs; if the nodule has turned to hardness like stone, and needs to be cut out, then scrape it away, and reveal the excess growth beneath; or have it removed by some scraper until it is gone and healed.
When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and slender, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excess swelling; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and moisten often with warm water, so that the attraction runs into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
the limb bent after health
When the limbs are bent after restoration, and the broken bones appear, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and even death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, they should be moistened with warm water, or herbs that soften are cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and you make a soft plaster, such as diaquilon well made, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and confit it with suet or fat of lamb, and make a plaster on it; or you take ripe figs, and crush them with colon dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is released by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands; and movement must be encouraged in the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is enlightened and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut into subtly and lightly, up to the bone; and put poultice and study in the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately try to reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the area swells and if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. So one must not move it when it is swollen, for this can often bring on a fever and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then apply hot water and oil to the affected member, then reset it gently and treat each part as it comes into its proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the mandibles
Then the mandibles become dislocated and both dislocations are according to two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and made pliable, or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around by speech.
When the dislocation is small, it will return to its proper place through many remedies.
And if it is complete and fully developed, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
And in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed, in order to apply pressure evenly. And instruct the patient to soften and move their mandibles from all sides.
And she keeps an even pace until she returns to her place.
And if the jaw is dislocated, especially if both jaws are affected, apply hot water and oil, and gently manipulate them until they return to their proper position; do not use force in this manipulation, as we have already instructed.
And when they are returned to their proper position and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place upon it wet cloths dipped in rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft ligatures.
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, and let him eat soft foods only, until the pain subsides and the jaws are mended.And if there is any swelling in the face, apply a poultice of roasted herbs to the affected area, and change it frequently until the swelling goes down.
and then let him eat what he wants easily, and do not try to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the mandible is well healed and cleaned.
And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destructive; and many times, the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
of the fork
The forceless cannot dislodge the constriction within the continuance of it and of the foot, and is dislodged sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and compress it;
and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislodged; if it can be, and if it is dislodged sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and compress it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And likewise is returned the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
You should know that the shoulder may be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and it may happen to dislocate from above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin; in those who are fat, it dislocates slowly and goes back in slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they get a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
And you will recognize a dislocation when it is downward toward the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the shoulder joint, it feels like an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
And also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it by feeling it;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or when the child is ill.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and lift the joint forcefully upwards into position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this will bring quick relief.
And if it does not work as we have described within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and anointed with softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of alfalfa, fenugreek, and sweet clover in water, and then bandaged.
Then the patient should be laid on their back, and a soft but not too soft or hard pillow placed under the shoulder, then the assistant places their heel on the pillow, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the affected hand;
and another minister dyes the head of the disease, so that it does not move down; the shoulder comes back right away, and if you see that he dislocates according to this way.
and it is that you make present a man who is bigger than the patient; and he stands straight towards the shoulder, and pushes his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lifts the armpit upward, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns right away.
And they dislocate it also in another way: and one fixes a long peg in the ground, so that the head is as wide as a pencil, and neither too big nor too small; then let him be put under the patient, but with a soft cloth above, and the patient standing upright; then let his hand be stretched out on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
and if it does not return due to all these things we have said, then perform this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, with its tip bent for easy insertion under the shoulder-blade, according to this shape:
then bind it with soft cloth above the shoulder-blade so that the shoulder-blade does not hurt the patient; then put it under the shoulder of the patient, and stretch his arm out along the length of the brand, and bind the shoulder to the brand, and the arm at the tip of the hand; then let the arm hang down, and the body lean to the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the shoulder-blade a woolen ball the same size, then apply the prepared ointment of flour-mill powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then stretch it under the shoulder-blade gently, and return the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the arm remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eats little, until the member is healed, for he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you must administer cautery to three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this and the joint still dislocates after seven days, and the shoulder cannot be raised upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly set in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat them until they are healed.
And if after healing, there is pain in the limb, and with movement, use the bath many times for the patient until the pain goes away and returns to its original state.
about the dislocation of the shoulder
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns by pins; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it when the abscess has come out, for if the abscess comes out, then it is painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and death may result.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, inside and outside and around, and press the joint at his wrists together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and presses from the root of the palm the joint that has been dislocated.
And if it will not return to its place, then provide strong extension; and let one minister extend the arm, and the other minister hold it, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide cloth;
and when he sees the joint of his hand, he lubes it with oil to loosen the joint, then bends the joint properly so that it returns.
and when it is in place, he applies a dry poultice with egg white, and holds it firmly, and binds the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, he removes the poultice and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, then restart the poultice and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the setting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and massage him well, and press until he is eased; place a fat snowball on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath. And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see that it is swollen, put moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is healed, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
And the remedy is that you place the affected hand on a table, and one minister stretches the hand, and another minister looks at it and puts it back in place, and then they bind it tightly so that it heals.
Nevertheless, you must make sure that it is in the right position; then place the patient's hand on a table with his palm facing upwards and his fingers extended. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lie with his palm facing upwards on the table, and place the examiner's hand upon that part of the joint where the dislocation occurred. If it now goes back into place, that is good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to the hot abscesses and leave it as it is without readjusting it.Et s’il est au coude ou a la jointe de la main, si li faildra que l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans et apostemes chaus; et si le laisse ensi sens rencomencier.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then the joint will remain crooked;
and does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and cannot squeeze anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to squeeze with a cautery below the case, and by chance nothing else is worth it.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then squeeze and let go for .v. days, then loosen and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez .
of the dislocation of the fingers of the handEt s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez ..
At times they are dislocated on either side of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the underside.
Then one should grip the finger, and pull the dislocated joint back into place, then hold the top of the finger and bend it towards the direction from which it was dislocated.
And let it be for two days, and then put it back in place on the third day; and bind it as we said before, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and bind it at night; and do this frequently until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated on the underside of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death hastens the disease.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump without willingness, nor can they hold them in, and many times members are weakened, both arms or one arm and leg.
And often the shoulder blade moves in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "wryness":
the cure is to determine whether the gout has come from childhood; if not, there is no cure or healing of it.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient books describe many ways to cure it with great words, but they have not much benefit in all cases.
But I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that gout which comes in the front toe has no cure or healing;
and also the one that comes straight in both sides, and cannot be cured unless it comes properly from the back, as I said;
and there is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one equal place, and has a restraint under him so that he does not bleed.
Then insert one brand in the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and are well closed, the tinder as we have said, and the surgeon puts his palms on the spine until it is healed.
And if it does not heal with this treatment, take a table 3 yards long, and shave underneath the edge, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the end of the table under the spine, then place the middle of the table on the spine. And the surgeon puts his feet on the other end of the table and presses hard until it heals; and if you see that it happens in the turn which turns to the hand.
And you should insert 2 tinder sticks at the head of the patient's arm, and 2 more towards the feet, and have between each tinder stick, above and below, a palm's width of space.
and in each torch hole, there is a turn, and the torches are firmly in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there is a turning torch, over which the chains turn, and in two turns there are two small torches the size of a palm, for turning the turnstile;
and then tie the link that is among the wheels to the turnstile towards the head, and the other link towards the feet at the other turnstile, and each of the ministers turns his turnstile all along the chain, and the master puts the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the tow, and then the steel of a tablet three inches long, which purples the site of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a link, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle pain-relieving medicine until he is healed.
and if nothing comes of the health in the end, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, so one must not have any presumptions about it: by chance it might bring about death.
of hip dislocations
You should know that only dislocations occur at the joints of the hip and shoulder, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the affected leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee opens more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over fire; and is the place which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of those who it afflicts are contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who it affects in front are that their leg is straight according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the veins swell, and when they walk, they walk over the heel.
And the signs of those whom it affects behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are: if the dislocation is old and it persists according to its nature, then there is no treatment; and it must not be assumed that it will get better on its own.
And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back into place and require no other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong bandage and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or tie it to the knee; and another person stretches his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his armpits, then tighten a rope around the thigh; and someone else tightens a rope around his head;
and raise them upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, that is good.
If not, one should apply treatment to the affected area. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should support the patient on their healthy side, then place the strap at the root of the thigh and the part below the armpit, then raise the strap towards the armpit and the breast;
then have another assistant grasp his arms and squeeze the large part of the dislocated thigh and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope under the two heels and over the two knees; let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it be hung from the top of a pole, about two arms' length from the ground; then command one assistant to hold the head of the thigh firmly, and another assistant hanging with the patient to hold the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said for one who has gout, and tie one bandage tightly around the affected leg and another around the foot.
Then put two pieces of wood, one at the head and one at the foot, then insert one piece of wood between the thighs at the affected side. and lay moist bandages around it so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant holds steady with his hand over the dislocation.
If it stays in place, that is good. If not, lay the patient on a table and press him as we said before, and turn his head towards the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and have the assistant put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push the leg down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the affected side downward or lift it up, but it should be positioned as though the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side. and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint on the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, apply the ointment, and hold it in place with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then stretch it as before, and leave it for 3 days; then release the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
Knees are dislocated in three ways: that is, on the inside, on the outside, and behind; but they are not dislocated in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and place his foot upon your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it apart with your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh lightly;
and apply the plaster to it, and make the leg bend at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not healed, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender to the touch at the site of the dislocation:
the movements should be gentle, and one must gently straighten out the affected limb when it is merely dislocated.
And when it is dislocated from everywhere, then you should have the patient sit upright and extend his affected limb .i. ministers forcefully by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand .ii. times, then extend it upwards and push the foot upwards firmly;
and do this three times as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that is good; if not, then do the operation again, for it will go back in.
and if it cannot go back in like that, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a post firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloth around it so that he does not move;
then one minister pulls the thigh, and another extends the foot with his hands or with a rope, so that he ties it to the post; then each minister pulls equally, and the post is held firmly between the patient's thighs to hold him in place as he is stretched;
then put mirrors evenly on the dislocation at his hands, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return slowly.
And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and pads on top, and straighten it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the ligatures are not too tight.
Then leave it for 1 or 2 days, and if the ligature loosens, straighten it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should go about their business within 4 days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
of the arms
When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
And if the dislocation is in the lower back or feet, then you should have the patient lie flat on his back or on a table completely straight, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presume in the curing, unless you are wise in the art and have used it a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then immediately return the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses heal;
and when the limb is in place, then minister hot poultices to the abscesses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small broken bones, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is good for you according to your Creator, and for the saving of your weapons and your body. Amen.
