O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, surgery.
And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to almost everyone, the knowledge has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except for brief descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have handled. And because of this, errors and vanities have arisen, intentions have been closed off, and knowledge has been kept at a distance.
I think it is necessary to animate this treatise together with the order of this work according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And one who engages in this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the veins moving and resting, and where their issue is located.
And because Hypocras says that what is known with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, beware that he does not make mistakes and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; because of which so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another physician who treated a stone in the testicles of a man, and the stone was large; he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
And I saw another patient who had broken his leg and had an open wound, and the ignorant doctor applied a splint over the wound with a strong ligature, leaving no padding over the wound, only a bandage; and he was instructed not to remove it. Thus the leg became swollen all the way to the foot, and gangrene set in.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to remove the splint; and when I did so he felt no more pain.
However, the gangrene was already confirmed in the limb and I could not heal it; and the gangrene continued to spread throughout the limb until it was entirely lost.
And I saw another patient who had a large abscess that became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
For when a ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And so, dear son, you need to know that manual labor is divided into two parts: there is work which carries peril in various situations, and I will demonstrate in each part of this book where there is doubt and peril.
Therefore, you must be careful so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms in caution, and approach your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grievous illness; and cast aside what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next with glory.
Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take ill health lightly, lest you be called a fool."
I have written this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it covers the head to the feet. It also includes the forms of instruments and all that is necessary for the practice.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, wounds, the extraction of arrows, and similar things. It also includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most extensive subject and subtle knowledge, and the secret responses; and about this, most of the wise men spoke and agreed; and I am content with a little of their words, for I am reducing the length.
I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether there are two complexes: namely, a hot complex without matter, and a dry complex without matter.
In hot and dry complexions, some people say that cautery is of great help; others say the opposite: that cautery does not benefit illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery aids hot and dry illnesses that originate in the bodies of humans. Because when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found this to be true through experimentation.
And yet we should not interfere unless those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the treatise on cauteries and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the timing; for other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery combines fire with secret remedies, and is of greater goodness than burning cauteries.
For fire is simple, and does not harm any member except the one that is burned, and it does no harm to any other member by name.
Burning medicines pass from one member to another by contact, and bring the disease of grief and healing to the members; and they may kill the patient.
Fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have placed in the art; and I stand on the truth of things. So I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. So receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon when the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious time.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially when the cauteries are for painful conditions that are urgent and cannot wait until a more convenient time arrives, lest greater harm come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery will not return; and they say so too; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not remedies that change the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and excel all other remedies in their effectiveness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordly power.
And it is possible that the disease may return according to the complexion of the ailment and its location and its power; and they are gathered within it through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, for they believe that cauteries are of no use after medicines have failed, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cauteries, and they work. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries with instruments of gold cause less swelling than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its noble nature; and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experienced and found in some people; and cauteries of gold are better than those of iron, just as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it can be heated in the fire; and so there is little hindrance.And so I have found that cauteries with instruments of silver are better than those of gold or iron, because they are not too hot and do not cause swelling; and I have also found that cauteries with instruments of lead are very good for certain diseases and are effective.
And for this we use fire cautery, which we have made ready for our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
the olive-oil cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to numerous ailments such as dizziness, toothache, throat pain, and especially those caused by coldness, like paralysis, soda (a type of headache), apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purgative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength and age of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where it will come to your two middle fingers, let it bleed then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it is formed:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make small circles while pulling your hand down and then up again; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you can see a tiny bone; if not, repeat the cautery until you can, as I have instructed. Afterwards, take a little salt, place it in soft cotton, and apply it to the spot; let it remain for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter on top; let this remain until the burns heal; then treat the wound with the ointment called  "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients say that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and therefore, they advise using leeches.
And some say that one should leave the cautery on so long that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone removed and cured.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on so long and press so hard that one breaks off a piece of bone as wide as a woman’s thumb, for so the humors can issue out freely; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, after which it must be cured and bound.
And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be good at all, except perhaps in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave them, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dissolutions of nature, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first application of cautery seems more safe and mild to me, then I use this method together with safety.
of the old pain in the head
When in the whole head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use the patient's herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and head purgatives, and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery which we have mentioned earlier, and it does not help.
Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under the fire cautery mentioned above.
Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place called "vessel"; there is a place where leeches are applied; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has performed the other remedies that I have mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this does no good: then one should apply cauteries according to two methods, namely with a hot iron and with fire.
The cautery with a hot iron is done thus: take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and place it on both shoulders, then make the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then untie it and move away from the garlic clove, leaving the wound alone for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter over it until healing occurs.
After the wound is healed, apply an ointment until it is completely healed; and if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The fire cautery is done as follows: heat the cautery so that it is hot enough to burn the affected area, and then hold it close to the skin for a moment, and then move it away.
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a closed fist, with a slight curve, and in the middle is a small appearance; and he puts it over the painful place, and holds his hand and twists it slightly, so that half the thickness of the heart is burned; and he removes his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is forced, and an abundance of blood flows.
Afterwards, put cotton in wine vinegar, and put it over the place for three days; then he puts wet cotton in butter, and then heals the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare", cauterize all the point, and beware of covering the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of hemorrhoid
When you heal hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus over the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible that mutates when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the mutation and may spasms come to the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stanch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it opens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the face as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
of ear pain from coldness
When there is ear pain caused by cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have discussed in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», which has this shape:
After you have pricked all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and then move slightly upwards from the root of the ear, where you have marked the affected area; and there should be .x. points around each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture which should be cured by cautery is only from those that move with fluid, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not perform cautery on appearances that come from dryness and inflammation of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves with fluid of idres and purges from the head, and from gargling, if it does not work, then you should cauterize the patient in 3 places: one at the root of the ear, another a little further up on the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear, just below the horn of the head, and the other on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the skull is burnt; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed before, but it should be a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker; after curing the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place called 'vassels', as we said before; and do the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach, and let it be treated as we said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large purifying pills to cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over and put on the occlusion of sinapi which is written in the treatise on occlusions; and here is the way to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries on the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, with a distance of one finger between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called 'olivare', as I said before.
of coldness from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and of anything else that we have mentioned before; then the doctor should cauterize inside the head and on each temple, once behind and three times on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, he should do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the heart is burnt, then lift your hand; treat the wound until it heals, and use the cautery we call "olive" that we mentioned earlier.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be cleansed of hair and other treatments that we mentioned in the division when the patient is suffering greatly and needs medication.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king touches his head in the middle, and does .i. cautery according to what we said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the ailment is forceful and painful, do cauteries as I said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I said.
If the ailment is in an infant, do 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the humours are corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with some cauteries as we said for those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, according to what is before in the division.
After the head of the sick person is bound with a bandage; then make a small pad well-shaped like a ring, and place it on the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then present the linen, and apply the butter of old ewe's milk; and heat gently so that they can bear it; then remove the bandage from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person once a week with good care, until they are healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small holes in the cautery tool. This type of cautery moistens the brain greatly; then place damp cotton wool in butter and chicken fat on top.
of the eyes When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink of something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After commanding him to look up, and having cauterized the scalp, and making two cauteries on the two temples if the branches of the artery are both there, or one if it is only one; and cover all the veins and arteries underneath the heart with the cautery, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood emerging, then stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, the cauterization of how to stop it; and sometimes cautery or hot iron is applied underneath the two bones at the back.
of the body from tears
When tears are old and habitual and are on the veins, or among the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: one cautery in the scalp, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with the hot iron underneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then cauterize bleeding on top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
where the body weeps from within them
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient 3 eggs to drink; after that, king the head, and cauterize him in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sorcis, a little under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the shape of the cautery called  "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called   "olivare". This is how it is formed:
And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two warts as long as the warts themselves; and do not leave off holding the paper until a third of it is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
the hair that points to the eye At times the hairs of the eyes are reversed and point towards the eye, and cauteries are performed according to two methods: that is, by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they sprout and are even, then put the patient's hand in a bucket of water; after that, draw on the paper over their eyes a figure that is as long as the myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be between the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and a leech over the eye, then heat up the cautery so that it matches the shape:
After cauterizing over the figure you drew bit by bit many times until it is burned in its place, the sign of the working of the treatment is that you see the paper retreat and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand away and leave it be for 3 days. Then put cotton soaked in butter on the burn as long as the blister has healed; after which treat with ointment until it is cured.
And if after this the hairs grow again and the paper softens, then do the cautery over that same spot again just as you did before; and if the hairs are broken off, then cauterize until the paper is lifted back to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make on parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one-third, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it over the paper covering the eyes; and if the illness is in only one eye, then work on that one, and if in both, then on both; and put under the eye cotton soaked in egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a bucket of water, and put your finger showing over the medicine, and press once and move it all the time that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he will feel biting as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift up the area of the bite, and examine it to see if the papery skin is lifted up as it was by the fire or by incision; and if it is, all is well. If not, then put more medicine on the site where the medicine has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes focused; then put wet cotton in butter on the burn until the heat subsides, after which clean the area of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes. And if the papery skin becomes soft after, and the hairs grow in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area which is soft under the papery skin, just as you did before; then clean it until it is healed; and this is the method for the mallow plant:
And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not deviate from the right path for one who has studied this art.
Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you must use cautery according to the following method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between your hands so that it does not move or nod; then soak cotton in egg white or pepper juice and apply it to the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a tent, with one end pointed and the other blunt; although the blunt end is better for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open and clean it out, then dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, apply the hot cautery directly to the area below the eye, holding the cautery with your hand so that your hand does not shake; place the cautery in the fat of the eye, corrupting it.
If you reach the bone at the beginning of cauterization, all the better. If not, repeat the cautery again once more, and yet another time if you need to, and then leave it for three days; after which, apply wet cotton in butter on it, and treat the wound with a desiccant ointment until it heals; and if forty days pass without healing, then apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes to him in his kingdom.
And there is one type of cautery for a fistula that some of the ancients mentioned. Make an incision at the site of the fistula, and then insert a thin, pointed instrument into the opening; after which, place a small piece of cotton in the split, and from which the shape of the fistula can be seen: and they make it the size of a split pea; and hold the instrument or your hand firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not enter their eye; and one should apply wet cotton in vinegar or awe to the eye. The lead will close the fistula's opening and heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good. If not, one must administer poultices to the nail, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cracks in the lips Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hairs," and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the section on treatments, but if it does not help: then you should use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleaning the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and the back side; do this once or twice after treating as we have said in the section on treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and place the hot cautery inside, holding your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your wish; then fill the patient's mouth with cold salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
And in such a way the tooth which was loose is now firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is needed: with a cautery of butter, or with a fire cautery.
Cautery with butter is such that you melt butter from milk, and the end in a spoon of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see the cotton and woolen fabric in the cold butter, apply it to the aching tooth, and hold a hot iron against it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a piece of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then rinse it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofula is due to cold humours and digestion does not obey medicine, then heat the cautery so that the form comes next, and have 2 openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, going deep into the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for 3 days. Then dress the wound with ointments and poultices until it heals.
When moistors conquer the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be cleared by dissolving medicines; then do cauterization at the root of the throat, and beware not to come all the way up to the throat, and don't burn the heart but just a little bit. Then do another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavicle" which we have described earlier; and heal the area as we have said before until it is healed.
of the throat When all diseases of the lungs are due to cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then do .ii cauteries on the chest in the places that are hollow; and another cautery between the .ii breasts; and use the cautery called "clavicle" according to the form described earlier.
And if you see fit, do cauterization in the point with all the cautery that is called "point" of which the form is given earlier for ear diseases; and make the points up to .xxx., or wherever necessary. Then heal the area according to what was said earlier, and use the cautery at .iii. intervals according to this form:
And for this reason cauteries are milder when you do them three times.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards soothe the patient on his back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two knots of wool, here is its shape:
and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and the figure of the cautery will be made up of four cauteries; this is why there is a cautery made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes it is placed on top of this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards, put crushed herbs on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
And if it is dislocated again, do little cauteries on the edge of the cautery, or a few cauteries in different spots. For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
with cautery of pus
The ancient physicians say that you must use cautery on a ulcer with roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, which is dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; moisten it in oil and heat it up in the fire, and apply 1 cautery between the Adam’s apple and the throat, and 2 small cauteries further down on the side that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth rib, bending slightly backwards; and 1 cautery in the armpit, and another one over the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 on each side of the armpit, away from the cautery between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand down hard, but do it gently as when you are applying a perfume.
And some ancient physicians say that some men use a cautery made like a razor, heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the ulcer; and they jump away from the pain, as we have said in the case of the liver ulcer. But in this treatment there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula develops which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they differ in three ways of cauterization which are all good.
Of which the first way is to make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the moon, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
and another way of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the kidney which is in the direction of the moon, or the sides of the patient come towards the left, and the elevation at which you lift the kidney according to the kidney, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
After that, put the two points in flames until the kidneys are pierced from the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you want, cauterize the entire cautery with three points. After the cure, when he has oozed pus for a long time, it is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery does not help dropsy except in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment is unsuccessful, then you must perform .4 cauteries around the chest, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two in the back on the spine, and one on the bladder; and the cautery should be close to the heart's diaphragm.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
of foot swelling When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical, and are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus you will dry up the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the base of the small toe; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, halfway up the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without bandaging, until the water comes out; then dress it with the other dressings that we have mentioned.
of menstruation
When the stomach is affected by cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment, then you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, you do .i. large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before about the cautery of the stomach; and .iiij. cauteries around the belly gently with .i. cautery knife thin, and .ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then do cautery on the elbow, and .i. cautery on each arm, and .ij. small cauteries on the stomach besides the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
on the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said with divisions, but it does not help, then do cauteries: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is completely under the armpit, little by little in a triangular shape, and .i. cautery under the belly. ij. times;
and if you think his stomach is chilled and the meat not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then on the face place a large cautery on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all cauterization of the clavicle; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After, cure the site until it is healed.
of the carnosity which is called 'thelul'
When you cut the thelul, heat up the cautery which looks like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and keep your hand steady so that the cautery reaches the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
of poorly healed wounds
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will relate in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be cured except by cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is swollen and oozing pus and corrupted moisture, then you should test it with a thin probe, and be careful to feel how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the probe went in, and repeat the cautery until the infected and corrupted flesh is burned one, two, or three times, depending on the quantity of its need; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins. If the fistula goes toward the bladder and the intestines, then be careful of those places, and do not apply heat to fleshy areas, and think that it is not sensitive; afterward cure the area until it is healed, and if the opening is still oozing after a long time, know that the fistula is entirely healed. And if the matter is not eliminated, know that the fistula has pierced through and corrupted the bone at the bottom; and in this way for all those we will describe in their place.
of kidney disease When there is pain from cold, and great windiness, and it does not take milk, then you must cauterize the kidneys on both sides with a fire- cautery as we have described before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he should have a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery as long as a fingernail; and he also has a cautery behind on the back, or two if you need it; and the cauteries are curved in the shape described before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and cannot produce a child due to corruption of the flores and late terms; and when they come, there is great pain: then you must do three cauteries around the abdomen, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind on the back; and the cauteries are curved, as we have said.
of the hip
When viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if one finds that there is pain in the joint, then you must cauterize the disease on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive tree, and let the cautery be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until it is better.
of hip pain When pain arises in the hip joint, it is caused by coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After this, let him be cauterized; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: one being the use of burning medicines, and the other fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, among which one is as follows: cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, with an interval between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if the pain reaches the thigh and leg, then let him be cauterized where he feels the pain with two cauteries there, and one cautery above the ankle on the inside of the foot; and let the cautery be cutaneous, and burn only the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both sides of the leg, then cauterize where he feels the pain with three points or four in the cautery called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then do cauterization with a flat or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who had cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted all over the foot. After that, he died from a belly-ache.
And if the pain is in two places together, do cauterization in one and the other, according to this manner. // And they said to the wise man regarding the cauterization of the hip, whose manner is this: make a piece of iron and let it be at the head as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and let it be pierced with holes, and let there be between the holes the quantity of the thickness of a little finger; and let the holes be on both sides, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be a handle well made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the hip that is ill, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of the ointment until it is healed.
Al-Buqatur says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its aspect, and seldom see those who employ it; yet it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and in the place where it is applied.
of back pain
When back pain comes from sitting or impact, or due to excessive loss of fluids, or due to similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances warrant cauterization except in the case that arises from the diffusion of cold matter.
It is appropriate after the patient has been cleared of foul odors or other appearances, that they are treated with a line on their back where the pain persists, with three lines signed in ink, and within each line .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the clavi-mean cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this, and you see it cured, then cauterize it with a cautery of salt according to this form.
So that the cautery purples every part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij or .iij lines apart, and let the points be close to each other. After curing the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in a circle which is on a nerve in spasm.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain in the joints is due to moistors that are expanded throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cautery in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form.
And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, do the cautery all around the "point." And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do the cautery on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries on each part, all cauteries of olive oil; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand against it longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, do points around the wrist 2 lines; and if there is no more pain in the arms, do points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and take medicine. For if you give him good governance and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
of the root of the ulcer
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum which is new, then when you see it being cured, let him not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces descend from his belly. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the hernia is repaired, and bring it back into your hands, and sign over the hernia under the bone of the groin, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this form is:
as white and bleeds. Then bring the testicles back to their place; and the minister holds his hand over it so that they do not return again; and work well on the groin of the patient, and put a cushion under him .and a sergeant on the groin, and another one on top of the penis which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign all across your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you get to the bone; and be careful that the hernia does not come out when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die, or another harm.
And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cauteries of children should be small according to their ears, and those of large people as large as them according to their measure; after 3 days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well-bound; and the patient's testicles should be left long enough so that they do not return when he tries to walk around.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage and wear it for another 40 days; and he should have good rest, move little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and too loud shouting; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment by cutting on his shoulder. of diarrhea
When diarrhea comes from other bellies and is recognized, and you see that it is not increasing, if you make 1 cautery with the hot cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the chest; after the treatment, according to what we have said. Some ancient people also said that it should be cauterized with a 3-pointed cautery according to this form:
But first sign the armpit and draw a line along the width above the diarrhea, and another one from the side, and hold your hand in between throughout the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to a limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with an iron called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its virtue, its location of twisting, and its pain. If it is healed from the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of that one, because such a course is usual, so that you should keep doing cauteries until the patient is healed.
of mixing
The head is sometimes cauterized with great benefit, and so are diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not go away or persist, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the whole body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand be so positioned that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors may come out; and cauterize it according to what is in front.
And if the mesh is scattered throughout; and it is lost apparently, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said before, one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the hip bone and another in between, two cauteries on the shoulders; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the arm, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
And you should know that the more cauterizations you do, the more it helps, and it benefits the patient; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the members and joints, according to how you find them in the manner of the irons. After that, treat the wound with flour from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size; let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the depth of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cauteries are made on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
of alder trees
When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts ground oats and lentils, with rosemary oil, and the blood of a blackbird and the blood of an almond tree; mix everything together and apply it, wrapped in a cloth, and leave it in place until it heals.
the treatment of sores by cautery
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more straightforward thing is that it is cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
[a swelling that cannot subside]
When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to the excess fluid, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old), and they have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
And place your hand over the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the infection is relieved. After the cure, when he is perfectly healed.
the fire cure by iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing but a rot in a limb, for it rots the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the affected area; then cauterize all over until you reach the corruption, removing all of it so that nothing is left but healthy tissue. Then leave it for three days and apply soothing ointments to the cauterized areas to heal the burns and remove any remaining corruption. If after three days new healthy flesh appears, that's good; if not, then re-cauterize where the corruption remains. This rot can sometimes be cured with medicine rather than fire cautery, but fire cautery is generally more effective. I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the relevant section: you know what to do when necessary.
of warts that come on the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet, due to coldness, a disease called "clos" in our opinion arises, and it is a large, faulty growth that discolors the toe. The cautery for this disease can be done in two ways: by fire cautery or hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat up a cautery iron as if it were a feather, made of good steel to fit the nail from all sides and with thin edges; then place it hot on the nail and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. Leave it thus for three days until pus begins to form; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, leave the poultice on overnight, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then heal the area with ointment until it is cured.
And if they are converted from the coldness in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, you should treat them with hot water cautery; it is done thus: take a brass or steel rod, or a feather of an arrow, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is, the small verrucas; then place the rod so that it presses all around, then put some hot water on it, and hold your hand steady while pressing your hand in a turning motion so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail and finds the hot water a deep path to the root. Let the patient endure the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Do this one after another until you extract all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that promote healing.
the cure for trembling
When someone is shivering from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, you must do four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will stop the shivering and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
of stinking pustules
Sometimes they appear as blisters or stinking pustules on the body, which come from large amounts of corrupted matter. At first, when they appear, one must do a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, with its tip heated in the fire, or from a long root of aristolochia, or with a lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further afterwards; the excess matter from which they come is disrupted, and they heal. However, this should be done after bloodletting.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great blood flow from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or on the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very sorrowful thing to stanch.
Nevertheless, when this happens to someone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very firmly until the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no more drips out; then take some olive-wood cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and heat them up; then take some salt, either large or small according to the wound, and place it on that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that is in the fire.Et s’il adons ne se pieçast pas, si met alerge sur li sans et li cautere sus li alerge, et tien toutes vos mainz sus li sans tant qu’il soit restainchiez; et si le sans vout alerge par la voinne, si li tiens sus qu’il ne se mueille.
And if it still does not stop bleeding, then put a bandage over the wound and the cautery on the bandage, and hold all your hands over the wound until it is stopped; and if the blood seeps through the wound, hold it there so that it does not move.
Whomever administers a tight binding of cloth or placing hot objects on it, or similar treatments, will not benefit much if at all.
And if it happens to someone and there is no surgeon or medicine available, then one should put their finger index on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure firmly on the wound and vein; and one must not move it but moisten it with cold water frequently until it is very cold so that the blood congeals, thickens, and stops; and one should prepare for what is needed in terms of cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization by fire or burning medicine, and the humors, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go in this chapter through the same path so that one may more easily find what they desire.
And so, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first chapter on cauterization, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish. Because many types of people come for treatment. Some are so used to their illness that they would rather die than give up their vice, and because of the seriousness of their vice, one must be afraid of them. And among these there are those who understand and say: "wait, I am healed"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not consent to those who come to you with such an attitude, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know for certain, and in what you can cure; and use prophecy and indication in treating illnesses where salvation is turned towards you. This will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing chapters, according to what comes before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
from the head full of water
Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from the cause of a prolonged pregnancy that one does not know about.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen, death was imminent; and because of this, it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in several stages.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swollen every day so that it could not support itself; and believed that the moisture had collected under the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split a large opening in the middle of the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and see the form of spasmile:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opening from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again; then you must split the head into four incisions in this manner:
And after the incision, draw out all moisture forcefully. After that, bind up the splits with rags and powders, pour wine and oil over them, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen the binding, cure the wound with tenting and poultices, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat, little by little, as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of making an incision is to examine where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and make the incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, lest blood flows out and the patient dies from bleeding and loss of moisture.
of gout
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best cure is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area around their eyes with a rough cloth until the arteries appear; then tighten the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein bleeds, and the veins on both sides are after the ears, and they are bound up; then sign the veins of both ears with a sharp spatulum two parts in size so that the cut vein reaches to the bone, and this is done from the side of the head.
And if you see that, push the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as well as .ij. fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow upwards continuously.
If the artery does not open on its own, then you must measure the space of three fingers and cut from the skin to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is half a pint, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains on top of the bone with no sign of suppuration, then extract the wound and ligate, and treat with ointment until healed.
of emetic
When old emetic comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient sores and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine but none help, then we should extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should grow the hair on his temples, and feel for the artery in the temple, for it opens easily with its beating, and is not very deep in some people who are too cold; and if it is deep, the patient should stretch his neck backward, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and apply warm water to the area until the artery opens visibly; then take the spatulum made of this material:
then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers and separate it well from the tissues underneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut off, the blood will not flow everywhere.
And draw the blood from 1/8 to 1/3; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is a steady flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery until it reaches the bone so that the shoulder is cut through; and this is the best method if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm complexion.
For cautery helps to dry up moisture; that is why it is most useful for moist wounds.Et si li artere fu grans, et la veinne en lui s’alonge, qui adonc le sans dou se fait plus fort, et le membre est par sa grandise et par son alonge en grand dan; adonc il covient que tu tornes a l’ostel et traies dou sang a .xii. ou .x. c/, jusc’a ce que li chiés soit sec ou sans dou; puis quier lo di, por ceu qu’il ne se tuit pas as nuytes. Or it is necessary to extract the artery if it is large and lengthens within it, so that the blood flow becomes stronger and the limb is in great danger due to its size and length; then you should return to the hospital and draw off the blood by 1/4 or 1/5, until the shoulder is dry or healed; then stop for a day, so that it does not burst during sleep. For when the instrument is too weak, it holds less heat. And it must have between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have signed on both sides, and you put the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they are spaced apart between the two heads because they are not joined by this cautery from end to end; and that is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not help to cure with medicine what one applies to it, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and feel in the forehead the movement as if of trembling; and if the oil is thin and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen, and the eyelids are burned, and scalded by the heat of the tears, then this cure is needed.
And the ancient called it "cured contusion", and you must do to the patient who has this disease, the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make .iiij. cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as .ij. fingers all over the forehead going down to the nose, and the other .ij. at .ij. sides above the eyes, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at .ij. sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of .iij. fingers across the join;
from the incision which is to the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the skin that is between the  .ij. cuts all over the cheek which is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this plaster.
if you put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharp at all, and that is the shape: And cut the incision slanting towards the chest and the armpit, and the lower incision towards the bone, and bind it tightly until it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the opening in the chest, and then make another incision in the middle split until the other defiant; then withdraw equally of blood, and express the site for the taken blood; then put a tent made of old cotton in each split, and place wet drapes soaked in wine, oil, and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming to it; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
from the eyes
When someone has chronic cataracts, and you see the eyes are pale and small, and the vision is weakened, and the eyelids are burnt, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is a painful ache, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these symptoms that these matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let it be, and it will be cured.
And you command the patient to lean forward, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another smaller one. Begin the incision from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move the jaw. When the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack cotton wool between the two lips of the incision, and apply tenting of linen; then bind dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses. When it has healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote healing.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, make an ointment from it and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
earache
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or an animal, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas, and other similar things.
When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or some other object that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun. If you see the pebble, then drop a little oil of violets, or oil of sesame, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze by means of a spice, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and expose the ear to the air above. Very often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, made thus:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out thus, then make an iron hook, and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for very often it comes out thus, as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take a leech, of which birds are taken, and place inside it some instrument made for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the leech onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that an abscess and spasms come out; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient bleed from the head vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and let the slit be like a crescent moon, so that you reach the pebble, then extract it according to your strength, and suck it vigorously with your mouth; and treat it until he is healed. If it is a grain which is inside and it swells up, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile held gently according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with tweezers gently and with a sucking device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the acute condition when fluid drains from the ear, the patient should use a warm compress on the first day and pack the ear with cotton wool. And he should lie with the affected ear uppermost. If the fluid flows out through the ear, that is good. If not, he should take small stones according to the size of his fingernail, and heat them; then he should put one end into the ear, and press on it from the other side with another stone, and continue doing this from stone to stone until all the fluid has drained out, as we have said in the case of a stone.
In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on foreign objects; but if it is a large object that can be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove when it is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and treatise on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, then pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the shape of the canal where they are.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And push the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of the suffering from the disease, then suck gently all along the canal; do this frequently until all the worms come out. And if they do not comply with coming out, then stop up the canal with cotton as I have said in the section on stones; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, so that the shape corresponds to what you see:
And it is made of silver or bronze with small holes below and openings above for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation apparatus use a well-made bronze instrument for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip skillfully; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then fill the razor with the cotton all along, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be slightly heated over fire so that it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the treatment of ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or pus forming within the ear, and sometimes these abscesses break through the ear, though one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a slight defect in the hole, yet one can still hear well.
Therefore, when an abscess breaks through and cannot be seen, it is a difficult healing process in various cases, and for this one, you should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the pus appearing, then the cure depends on how it appears.
And if it is sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the abscess is due to pus or the body of the ear, then hold it with delicate tweezers and squeeze gently until all the pus is removed.
And if the obstruction is complete in the ear, take a fine razor, heat it slightly in the fire, and then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction that causes the patient pain when he hears, pierce gently, being careful not to sever the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for several days until the wound is closed; then take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with pulverized vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened with cerate made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is reduced; then clean the wound until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and some cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood which are found in the treatises on distilling fluids.
of paper charcoal
This ointment, when it comes on paper, moistens itself and dries up; therefore you should spread it with tweezers and pincers, and the blade of a spatulum from its roots; then put ground vitriol over the site.
And if it is without skin, one should cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and after the incision the mouses return; and many times they come back, as long as something remains in their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned up and do not return.
of hail
Many times they come on paper as something that looks like hail in both form and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called "hailstone"; it is an assemblage of moisture thick on top and bottom; its treatment is as follows: first, ensure that the hailstone does not move from side to side, and this is a simple thing to know; then cut it open with tweezers and pincers, and split it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, it will not harm the patient; but if the crack is large, and there is an abscess, treat and clean it until it heals; but if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it and heal it at once.
And if the otitis is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and grip it with pincers, and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the otitis is cured, remove the pus with water, and cure the place of that which causes the pus until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it is very painful for their eyes; and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces, and sleep on top of them, and the papers under their eyelids become moistened by the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, it comes out between them.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head in yours; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers from one side to the other, so that the exinach is collected within the circle. Then cut into the moisture with the spatulum, making an incision no larger than the wound that is made in the bleeding of a vein; and in various dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Therefore, take a piece of cloth and fold it between your fingers, then turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the eye, lest you damage it.
And if the exterior opening appears at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure slightly so that it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and apply it to the site, and use a bandage.
And if there are those who break the skin and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat the wound until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the site, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et si li exirnach vient sus le chiés de l’ajutoire qui est le plus proche de la fendeure, si lou cure si com nos avons dit; et s’il est desaloiez, si remets a leu et estrain; et si il ne demoure pas, si retorne a destre et a senestre et estrain tant qu’il soit remes a leu; puis l’estrai.
of the hair of papers
When hairs grow from papers that are not of their nature, and they become entangled, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the paper, and albuginea, leading to the destruction of the eyes; there are four ways to treat this: by cauterization with fire, or with an aqueous medication according to what is described before the chapter on cauterization, or through incision and suturing, or with cannulae, as I will explain.
You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; otherwise, insert an aiguille with a single thread through the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are growing, and run the thread over the entire eyelid, then turn the eyelid back to its original position; next, make an incision under the eyelid, under the abnormal hairs, cutting towards the tear duct, from the large lachrymal gland to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the eyelid; finally, apply a signet ring over the eyelid, shaped like a myrten leaf, and adjust the shape according to the amount you want to lift the divided eyelid.
And if there is a need to cut out a large portion of the eyelid due to its softness, then make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the large lachrymal gland up to the small one; ensure that one of the incisions is near the natural hairs and extends to the thickness of a hair root; then insert a needle into one of the corners of the wound, and lift the eyelid completely; next, assemble the two edges with a single thread of fine woolen yarn through an aiguille, and tie it tightly to stop the bleeding; finally, apply a poultice of dry, constricting substances over the incision lines on both eyelids to promote healing; leave the thread in place for three or four days, then remove it and treat the wound without sutures using dry, astringent poultices; the eyelid will heal quickly, and there is no fear of disfigurement.
and if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a shape that is like the leaf of myrrh, as we have described, at .III. inches apart according to the shape which is here:
then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is there:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the thing is not even, then take a needle with which you have .1. thread, and sew it into the middle of the figure; and sew another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin on which you have signed, as we have described, then bring together the .2 lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerot
and sometimes the hairs of the paper are reversed: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of the bones is as follows: you must turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile; tie them with two strings into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper for the eye, strain the two bones from their two formed parts; leave it thus for several days, and the skin that was strained will die and harden and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it takes time and the wound still hurts, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer grow there. And this is how you make the two bones according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
the operations are such that you thread a thin needle, and tie to it a fine and thin silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie them subtly together, and let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm; then prepare in the case another fine and short silk thread, and tie its ends together; then place the patient's head on your lap; and have the operation performed in the light of the sun so that it is visible, for this is a subtle and small operation; then thread the needle all the way into the paper close to the root of the hair, and draw it out through the paper gently until you draw out the natural hair; then draw your hand back so that the hairs come out straight and with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the chase below to the very end that you have ordered for it, until the chase comes out from the hole above and you see it with the eye of sight; therefore, then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it heal for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and new flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany a long hair from the natural horses, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it is elongated and then release it.
from the inflammation of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or inflammation comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from wounds, or cuts, or cauterization, and similar things.
When the inflammation comes from nature, one cannot heal the illness by anything other than time; for it subsides and leaves the vision alone. And the way to treat it is that you split the swelling, loosen its edges, and place within it tents of linen, leaving it to heal; and one must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before; but one should use softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and cooked daiquilons, and ointments of linseed oil, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
And the goal of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease, that it does not return according to its former shape.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease which is below and is truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and splits and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and stab into the flesh, and let it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on the right, so that the flesh is above all the needle, and the loop is spread wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make 2 cuts along the side within the paper; let the sides of the 2 cuts be at the 2 angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter which has the form "J". Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges have been cut under the paper, then attach the two severed parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure it as we have said, with softeners and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or sewing or cautery, then you should make a plain split under the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said above; then pull apart between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare instruments with all their power so that they can bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need in terms of treatment and tools, with various dispositions.
suddenly from the paper
When this soudure happens to human beings in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore push the tip of a scalpel under the paper and lift it up; and treat it with tweezers, so that you grasp what is open on the spatula, which is neither too pointed nor too trenchant, so that the patient cannot endure that the spatula, which is too sharp, pierces the eye; and your incision, by which you peel away this union, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a watery discharge, and it is relieved with warm water and a poultice; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and place over the eye moist wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the collar and soothing remedies until it is healed.
of the nail of the eye
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervy and resembles a hard cyst; and another which is not nervy but resembles white congealed moisture, so that when one touches it with iron and tries to pierce it with pincers, no one can. And both kinds begin at the large lash, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all its light and movement.
And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers of small wire, and grasp it at the top; then take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair through it; and double the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and grasp it at the top, and scrape along the side of the nail following the shape of the eyelid down to the lash line, then cut the rest at the root of the lashes to the thin edge, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid, so that by the incision does not come the usual tear fluid; and sometimes only the nail is grasped at the lash line, and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all along the shape of the eyelid:
And be careful that the eyelid does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the lash is not pierced; and after the incision, put a little crushed chalk in the eye, and from the collar made of litarge, leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with a needle, nor can the nails enter, this kind of nail is often cured by medicine; it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule gently and pierce according to this form:
And raise the nail gently, and if you see it is not reduced and the pus still flows, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore ground fine, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the treatment as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it on a needle, and cut off part of it but not all, so that no body of pus comes out; then distill into the eye red collar made from litharge.
of the flesh that grows on the eyeball
In some people's eyes, sometimes red flesh grows and covers the eyeball, pressing against the eyelids and turning inwards, resembling a rosebud; so the patient should hold his head steady while you work on the eye, then cut away all the flesh with tiny scissors appropriate to this task, keeping a firm grip; next, cut away the first piece of flesh, then continue cutting carefully right down to the root, being careful not to damage the eyeball during the operation; and use the same method we described for the nail incision, with gentle pressure to remove the growth, as demonstrated in this chapter.
Once the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made from crushed stone or you can distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, then cover the eyeball with a pad soaked in egg white to protect against hot abscesses; if there is nothing left but a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat only the abscess with soothing remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your work once it has healed, and continue in this way until all traces of the growth are gone.
However, you should always treat weak eyes with natural remedies and accidental injuries with iron instruments; do not insert your finger in any of these operations until you see that the patient is suffering less from the treatment.
of the veins of the eyes
These are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they impede vision and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eye, because if there is any other disease besides the stye; then you must treat it in this way: instruct the patient to tilt his head back, then gently squeeze those veins at their base according to your judgement, making the base of the veins very thin according to this form:
And two incisions in a .i. body according to this form:
Then squeeze these veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the stye.
And if you have no power to draw them all in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye of things which ease the pain of them, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of hot abscess, then begin again according to this method before it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
Examine the so-called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and fiery medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is an infection in it that you should lance upon the abscess, where it must remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then use this instrument to scrape away the corruption; and it is called  "aspre chief" , and it should be made of iron with a pointed end as it is in the present form.
And place on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
if the fistula is closed and healed, and the body of the bow is closed and remains so for 40 days, and no bad accident occurs, you may be sure that it is healed; if not, there is nothing else to do but to open the fistula through the nostril again according to this form: first, uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a .13. -angled iron probe, and thin out its tip so that you see here:
then place the probe on the bone at the bridge of the nose, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then push the probe in again until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the pressure of the wind if he keeps his hand over his nose; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you; when the char emerges and hardens up the site, he will go to the doctor; this is a gentler treatment.
from the exit of the eye:
When the eye is completely open all around and does not cause disturbance or thinning of the nerve, then you should ligature the patient; then heal him, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out the blood, then apply a poultice made of aconite, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla onto the eye, and then bind it with bandages and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, double each one into four parts, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then tighten them from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches to draw out without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye tightly bound day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should tighten it a lot; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, drapes, ligature, and leeches until it is healed.
from the breaking of a woven fabric
When disruptions occur in a woven fabric, then open it up and it appears like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the part of the eyelid; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a warm egg white to the eye; and let it be until the threads cut through the fabric, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric on all sides in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatulum that comes from the bottom of the eye, and dry the moist white and lower the eyes, and enter so quickly; then pull it as long as he is healthy.
of the eye socket
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing but a swelling in the eye socket, resembling a descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit upright on a raised seat or chair, then hold his head between your hands for a while, and move it until you see the eye socket come up to your eyes. Then it is fixed in place, and the light should no longer be obscured, and the patient can see things as before. If it doesn't descend beneath that point, know that it is water, but if the swelling of the eye socket is not apparent as we have described, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatulum and press on the surface of the cornea and the conjunctiva, until the eye socket protrudes. Once it is protruding, distil into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey added, then let it be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
of the eye waters
We have the appearance of the ague in its division, and what it is necessary to pierce; then do according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that he faces the sun, and press his healthy eye tightly shut; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument alongside the crown through the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to where the lower tear duct is, then pour the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horny membrane, and then put the instrument where the ague is, then express underneath one way after another. If the ague descends now, then the patient sees the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, and if the ague returns through the second path, put it back with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, then gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand a little; then put in the ague some drops of sealed gem, and take out that eye. Then put on the eye, as a poultice, linen soaked in rose oil and in plenty of egg, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on comfrey with plenty of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you must take the instrument which is called  "alberit", of which this is the form:
And therefore cut the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then pour in alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare the patient a dark room to sleep in on his back in a dimly lit space; he should avoid all movement, eat light foods, and not move his head or turn it to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then loosen him in the same dark room, test his vision, and show him some things, and then release the bandage after seven days; and you should not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should relieve this, so that the fluid drains quickly.
And if a warm abscess comes, release the eye before the seventh day, and use the remedy for abscesses; and when it is soothed, release the vision and put over his face an eyelid to cover one eye, and keep him in that dark room. And then go out of the room little by little, and return to his normal state; and know that no disciple should interfere with this case.
And one came to us from Spain who said that in his land they used alum, which draws out the fluid, but I have never seen it in our land, and I have never read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is a new thing. Et quant tu vees li oilez enflatz et rouges, si li faiges .i. baume de .vi. draps de l’huile d’ole et .ii. draps de candeille verte, et li faigez une frotteure de ceu; et quant il est frotté, si le lie avec un lien de linnen blanc, et met sus la veue  .i. orilliet por covrir les oilez, et soit adés en telle maison tenebrouse. Et si li faige la frotteure par la nuict et li remette le baume au matin, et il se tienne adés jusc’a tier jor; puis deslie la veue et met sus ses oilez  .i. orilliet de linnen blanc.
And these are the appearances of the forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly of bronze:
And let the heads of the awls have this same thinness, and let the rear ends be in four angles.
of the heart over the nose
Sometimes they arise as nosebleeds with various shapes, from which there are some that look like scorpions with many feet; and others have a colored vein, and others have a blue vein. For the one of these veins that is blue, and not enlarged, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and drop the oil on those veins, and draw them out; then do what you can bear with the stinging needle from one side, until you know that the vein is completely gone.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or abscess, dry it as it should be; and if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stanched and all the pus is removed, then pour wine or vinegar on it.
If the ears are affected and moisture extends to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is pus in the bone above, and the instruments do not reach to cut: therefore you must insert a piece of linen thread, about a finger thick, and let it hang from the hand, with intervals of one digit or less between each finger; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth to his greatest ability, and pull through until it reaches the odorant; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and draw them gently apart while you feel the thread against your fingers. Do this until you know that the thread has reached the infected pus, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all the remaining pus; then put a piece of cotton in the nostril for several days to allow it to heal, and if medicine is needed to dry it out, use it. This is the form of the instrument used to clean the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
It should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it should be handled in the same way; if you want to make a closed tube, fill it with medicine to clean the head; and there should be a handle on the head to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid.
of the heart above the diaphragm
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the head, and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it until it becomes large, take care whether it is hard, of a dark color, and insensible: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, for when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, and not from a dark color, and you see that one can cover it all, then evacuates the patient and cuts it without fear, and cures the place of dry and constricting things.
when the heart is cut and sewn
Know that when pus of a wound comes into one of these cartilage membranes, it is of little benefit to some people; therefore, when this happens to someone, examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; then cut off the .ij. lips with one stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are split on both sides, then you should scrape away all parts of their skin until they heal, then stitch together the .ij. lips, and fasten them, and powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and powdered incense; and place upon the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
of lip abscesses
In the home remedies for lips, there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; therefore, you should split the lips and cut on each nodule with tweezers, then apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use an onion poultice, and treat the area with dry remedies until it heals.
of gum disease
Many times a growth emerges on the gums, which the ancients call "albus". You should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, letting the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other binding and drying powders, on the wound. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery, that is how you treat an abscess.
of the ears. Take a small piece of wool or linen, dip it in oil and apply it to the ear; then take another piece of linen and tie it around the head so that it pulls on the affected ear. This will cause great pain, but it will also dislodge any object stuck in the ear. If this does not work, take a pair of tweezers and try to grab hold of the object with them; if you cannot grab it firmly, cut off the end of the object that is visible and leave the rest inside. This may cause some pain but will not be as uncomfortable as having an object stuck in your ear. If the object is too deeply lodged to reach with tweezers, take a sharp knife and cut around the object, trying to grab it with the tweezers at the same time; this will help loosen it. Once you have removed the object, apply oil to soothe the pain and promote healing.
some are gathered at the root of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and they appear as ugly and rough patches; sometimes a tooth is black, green, or yellow, especially when corruption has reached the gum, and the breath of the patient smells foul; in such cases, you should make the patient hold his jaw in your hands, and with your fingers, pick at the teeth where the sores are visible, until nothing remains; and you should do the same for any discoloration, whether black, green, or yellow, until they are cleaned. If what was causing the issue is removed on the first try, that is good; if not, then repeat the process again the next day and the day after, until everything is clean. You must understand that teeth require various forms of treatment to remove sores, depending on what the condition reveals, so that the tools used to clean them differ from those used for general cleaning; these tools should be prepared and available to you.
It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as long as you can, for this must not be done hastily; for it is a very sensitive substance until one has no more excuse to pull it. Therefore, when the patient is compelled to have the tooth pulled, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient and makes him believe that the ache is in the healthy tooth, and he has the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain is not relieved through this, until the evil tooth is removed, for we have already tried this with those healers. And when you are certain of the tooth aching, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all around very firmly to push back the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers tightly; and let the head of the patient be between your knees, and hold him so that he does not move.
Afterward, pull the tooth out straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, it is necessary that you fill the holes with lint, and press it gently with the tweezers so that it does not break while being pressed; and it is necessary to work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part of it, and bring back to the patient through the wickedness of the root greater pains than before. And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who, in their haste and audacity, sometimes break the jaw, and do not pay attention to what we have mentioned; but sometimes they bring about great illness through the irritation of these, either by the roots which remain, or by the breaking of the jaw, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The shapes of pliers, whose teeth bite first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And they should be made of sturdy metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and serrated to hold the tooth firmly.
from the tooth root When the root remains in place while pulling, you should place wet cotton on the area for one or two days until it softens, and then use pliers called "algefri", which are shaped like a surgeon's mouth; they should be serrated inside like a file. This is their shape:
And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and put in the instrument called "althali", that is, pliers, of which this is the form:
And let it be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
And if one uses this instrument with .ij. jaws, of which this is the form:
and other tools that are before in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
And let this instrument be so strong that it cannot break, and know that many instruments for teeth there are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease shows him, for he has different diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it doesn't break in the carriage or other bones, or it protrudes, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And let them be large and strong to hold the bone so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines. And if there is protrusion in the bone and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
When the teeth appear abnormal, contrary to the natural order of the body, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument, whose form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point:
And push it little by little into the gum for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this, whose form is as follows:
and is also like the file with which needles are made; and in filing, the tooth a little bit, bit by bit, lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth it at the end with a rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file off the roughness so that it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the front teeth loosen, through a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what he eats without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it doesn't work; then they should be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves; and the wire should be medium-thin or thick, depending on the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and loop it between the two healthy teeth, then push the loose teeth in between the healthy teeth, one at a time, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then go back to where you started and pull your hand gently but firmly, so that it does not move. The gold wire should be placed against the tooth root so that it does not escape. Then, using tweezers, loop the wire around the loose teeth, bring them together, and secure them so that they do not cut the tongue; leave it as tight as possible for as long as it will stay, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then secure it with another wire. It should stay in place and function properly, and this is the shape of the teeth and how to straighten two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you can see:
And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and only someone who is experienced and skilled should attempt this, and sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is shaped and put in the place where there is a defect, and secured as we have described, and it remains and functions thus for a long time.
to cover the line of the tongue
At times this line comes from under the tongue due to nature, as some are born with it; or due to an accident causing a wound; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and place his head in your lap, and loosen the tongue; then cover the nerveous line broadly so that the tongue is loosened from its socket, and if there is hardening under the tongue due to a wound, then cut it with the knife broadly and gently; and be careful that the incision is not too deep so as not to pierce the artery underneath; and when you have finished, raise the area with rosewater and garlic, or with cold water, then place a tent made of linen under the tongue; and every night tie the patient's mouth shut so that no food can enter. And if there is bleeding, apply powdered vitriol; and if the bleeding persists, cauterize it with the lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat the wound with other remedies until it heals.
And if you see it is of a dark color or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, for it is a ulcer; and if it is inclined towards whiteness and there is moisture, then cut it with the knife, and open it from one side to another; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment until you have removed everything; then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat the wound with other remedies until it heals.
Of abscesses in the throat:
Sometimes bumps form in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as described above and they do not heal, be careful: if they are small, hard abscesses of a dark color, do not touch them with iron; and if they are red and the root is swollen, do not use iron for fear of bleeding, but let them bleed naturally; then cut them open. If they are white and the root is thin, have a tool ready to cover them, but first check that the abscesses are warm and calm. Then let the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, his mouth open, and his tongue pressed down by the surgeon's fingers between his hands. The instrument used for this should be made of thin silver or brass, like a small knife.
As you press the tongue down with this instrument, you will see the abscess. Then take a pair of forceps and grab the abscess, pulling it up and out as far as you can; pull out any threads from the ton-sil along with it. Then cover the instrument again so that it looks like an arrowhead, and the tips are curved inwards towards each other, and very sharp, made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument available, then cover a pair of tongs so that it takes the shape described above.
And they are sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle with water, or with pomegranate peels that have been cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely one small abscess; and it had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if it continued for another day or two. And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced its way through the two openings of the tonsils. So I quickly acted, and inserted a hook into one opening, then pulled out a large portion of pus; then I did the same on the other side of the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterward, I inserted the hook into the abscess and cut away at it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine. And I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time; and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
of the eye
When the iris descends to the pupil and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "iris". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the surrounding eye is soothed, and it becomes thin; and it is rounded together and not long; and it is blood-red or the color of ash or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, from its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the eye, and draw it underneath, and cut using one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. You must not cut any further than the natural limit; for if you cut more, it causes pain in the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears having it cut, then you should use an agent for cauterization to reduce the fear. And the method of cautery is as follows: The patient puts his head against your healthy eye, then presses his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is applied with a hot iron so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the implement of this instrument, from which these instructions are taken:
And it has a stem on the end where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down into the throat and cause bleeding. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become firm and the bites of the medicine are soothed; and if you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton on top, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after cauterization, wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamine and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and put all or some of them into a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil; the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and the end of the instrument should be chewed according to this method: And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the lips is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; then he should do this frequently, until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put inside it an egg-shell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell does not allow the vapors to burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with salvation.
Many times a bone or fish spine, or some object, becomes lodged in the throat; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the end should be raised upward; and take care not to touch the epiglottis so that its wall does not tear, nor push the bone inside; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he moves where the object is lodged; then he swallows it downward, or pulls it out with the entire instrument equally, until it comes out.
of the phlegm of the throat
Sometimes the phlegm is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the phlegm, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this. And if this does not work, take a small dog's tail, and put it into the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the tail in hot embers, and do this often. And if the patient is sick with water all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving it around with his hand often; and as soon as the phlegm feels the water, it will loosen.
And if it does not loosen as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for the fumigation of the throat; do this many times, for it will surely loosen. And the way to do the fumigation is to put hot coals in a pot and cover the top with a perforated lid, and put the instrument through the hole; then pour in your fumigation, and have the patient put the end of the dog's tail into his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the phlegm; and the phlegm will surely loosen now. If it does not loosen, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salted and dry things, and drink no water; and then it will surely come out through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to draw out the phlegm, when one can see it, is similar to bent tweezers so that they can enter the throat; and it is like a pair of forceps, and it has roughness from lime, so that what it grabs it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
the chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, depending on their appearance, as the recollections that follow from one and another in this book show, and they differ in puncturing and size; and there are two ways in which they occur, one in their appearance, and the other in the places where they are located in the body. For an abscess of the head is different from one of the fundament, and an abscess of a fleshy part is different from one that occurs at a joint, and each has its own treatment.
And with some abscesses one must not puncture until the pus is mature according to its course; and there are some that one must puncture when they have become crusty, and will not mature according to their course, like abscesses which are near a joint. For when an abscess occurs near a joint, if you let it stay so long that it becomes pus-filled all around, the ligament and nerve of the joint may become damaged due to contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is near a principal member, if you delay the puncture until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; but if it is near the fundament, one must puncture it so that it may mature; and one should not puncture a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for one that is near the fundament, which may become pus-filled and elongated inside, causing a fistula, and will not heal in a short time.
And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fullness, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make the piercing in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and the piercing should be deep in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
And in those that fold, according to the part of the body. And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, you should let it heal until there is complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it earlier, it will lengthen the body with venom from it, and it will be filled with much dirt; and perhaps the lips and depths of it will harden. And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And you should treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for some of these abscesses one should split the head, and cover it; when it has become like a piece of cloth, and is dead, then one should do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split in three angles, and some of which one covers like a myrrh ball, just as for abscesses of the intestines; and there are some on which one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those that do not have a head, like a superficial abscess, one should pierce it directly; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn a great deal of pus, if you do not draw out all of the pus in one hour, but a part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw some more from it; do this repeatedly until all of the pus comes out; especially if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the pus will spurt out with such force that it may kill the patient, and you may not realize it. Be very careful with this chapter, therefore; and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, then treat it with tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then one should place a tent in each opening so that they face each other; and if you have split part of the skin and removed it all around, then fill it with old cotton or dressing made from linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cool water and a piece of damp cloth, and hold it over the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, apply pressure and treatment, and the powders that I have described earlier in this book; and if it is during winter, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should place damp tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place damp cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cool wine and oil for a third of the day, as we have said; and then open the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it heals.
And now I will briefly discuss the treatment of abscesses: earlier I described how one should approach treating abscesses, and you can find that discussion in this chapter.
of sores
From the head come small abscesses, and they are similar to those of us who live in towns, like the spots on a goose, and there are many variations. Some are full of fat and others contain pus with moisture; there are also those which are hard and stony in texture, and these cause no concern if the artery does not pulsate against them. The treatment for such abscesses is to use an instrument called an "entromissoire", which comes in various forms depending on what it contains. If it contains moisture, it should be incised from above, and when the moisture has been drained, the skin over the abscess should be cut away without leaving any residue, as it will heal better that way. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and salt, and apply this to the wound, leaving it until the next day, repeating the process for three days or until you are sure there is no more pus. Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it heals. If the abscess contains a hard lump of fat, lance it from above and drain the pus, then cut away all the dead tissue and apply a poultice to draw out any remaining pus; if the artery pulsates against it, follow the instructions given earlier. The same treatment should be used for stony abscesses, as well as for those that are deep or difficult to treat, as described above.
Abscesses that are both moist and stony are easier to treat than those full of blood. There are also abscesses that contain no moisture, such as the one I lanced on the head of an old woman; it was like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be crushed, and would have caused a wound if force had been used. Abscesses occurring on the head or near the ears should be left open at the lowest point to allow pus to drain, and treated as necessary.
of scrofula
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are intertwined with each other. Each scrofula is properly within its own compartment, as is the pustule and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofulae. Some contain moisture, and others are malignant and refuse to respond to treatment. Therefore, in the one that you see has a good disposition for cauterization, and resembles the color of the body, and is flat on each side, and is not swollen on the nerves of the neck, or on the artery or duct, and is not deep; you should cover it from above, and cut away at each side, and the two lips of the heart should be at an angle, if you need them to be, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not use the spatula or knife so aggressively that the hand slips, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it will not let you work, put into the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stop bleeding, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, until you have finished; then seek out any small scrofulae that remain, cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them closed, so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should attend to cutting away at its root and drawing it out, as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce it in the same way as the one before, hanging down, then apply tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with an ointment that promotes healing.Et se li scrophule sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre, si covient que tu les disjoignes, et quier a ton doit indice s’il y demoureit aucune petite scrophule dedens la grande, si la cope et munde; et quier as tu as dit. Et si li scrophule sont grantz et contienent moistor, si covient que tu les disjoignes, et traies le moistor fuer, et cout la plaie, et la cure de tentes, et oignement, et semblans choses; et s’il y a aucune petite scrophule dedens la grande, si les cope et munde, si com nos avons dit.
of squinting
The ancient wrote and spoke of the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is a transcript of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary for the membrane in the throat called the "epiglottis" to be incised; and this should be done with a cautery, because all the veins and the pons of the malady are located in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the malady is in the canal of the pons, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent asphyxiation due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it under three or four small splits, through the two circles, or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate, but not in the cartilage.
and those places if they are suitable for the split of the epiglottis, that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then split the cartilage as far as it will go, and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the soft palate, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the split of the windpipe from the gap that was broken, and by the fault of the voice.
and leave the wound open a little bit.
And when the hour is passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and stitch it up all the way to the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Al-Bukhtishi says to do this only until the throat is completely blocked and the patient is judged to be dead and the deficiency of the liver. So one should cut on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be guarded from death.
and for this reason the ancients commanded to let the wound remain open until the malice of the disease passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut open part of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
I exposed the wound and found that blood had flowed out of it, and that she had not coughed up any blood or phlegm, and the blood had issued through the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
and the lady had nothing but a hoarse voice, and she returned afterward to her natural state;
for this reason, I say that one should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
of the large throat
This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess the colour of ash, and it occurs often in women;
and it has two forms: natural, and accidental; a natural hernia does not have an evident cause.
And the accidents occur in two ways: one is similar to a growth on our skin, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes out of an artery; and there is fear in it, and one should not operate with force except on the small ones, and test and examine all the orifices; if you find it like a growth of skin, and it cannot be moved in any way, then cut it as one cuts into the skin, and examine all of its surface if there is nothing there. and examine well throughout, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is perfectly healed.
of us
There are many ways of us, which I will tell you all about.
and now I must tell you the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
I say that issue is when there is a fever and heat, until the crisis has passed and the discharge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With no heat or fever, and containing a syphilitic ulcer, which is its own sac and follows the color of the body, and begins like a jaundice, and becomes large;
and are according to their appearances, some are dry, some moist, and they have a wide range of colors, as I have said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ulcer, that you first test and examine it with the instrument called "encompass", according to how its shape appears in the chapter that follows.
The manner of examining abscesses is that you press the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and gently twist your fingers back and forth, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then withdraw the trocar, taking care not to slip.
If the pus runs clear, whatever its colour, they should treat it as I have said for other abscesses:
and if no pus comes out after the trocar is inserted, know that it is tough, so they should make a cross-shaped incision and remove it with tweezers, and gently scrape off the scabs on each side, and dress the wound with a clean bandage.
And if you cannot clean it all at once, then clean it in parts so that nothing remains.
For if he remains there, he will return to us many times.
and if he stays a little, and the wound is not painful, then treat it with some corrosive powders, and press the wound, and apply warm poultices to soothe the abscess, and cure the wound with other remedies until it heals.
and if the patient is elderly, then cut both lips of the wound, and treat it with a poultice that draws out pus.
and if the vein is throbbing, or if something else is wrong, then use powdered vitriol and leave it on for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to treating it as before.
Here are the forms of the instruments for incising, and they are of 3 kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are 3 types among them which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb"; and there are also 3 ways to use them: large, medium, and small, to circumcise abscesses with fistulas.
They are similar to the needles used to sew sorcerers' spells, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver. Those that are yellow in color are equally as effective as those made from black lead, and they are used to circumcise abscesses with fistulas.
They come in 3 sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture.
The shapes of the knives are of various kinds, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are also knives with 2 curves in 3 ways.
and if there are any with three curves, and they are also in three ways; and if there are any with two curves, and others with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of those with which one cuts are cutting, and there are some that do not cut except from one side, so that the brain is not cut, nor the nerve.
And these intromitters are placed in handles, so that the patient does not hurt himself when opening abscesses;
and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and we do not use it any more than in the fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and around the nipples, and in similar places;
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling slices of a potato, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped:
and sometimes it is applied to the place that heals by cutting the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they heal according to this great shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he should apply the cautery according to this formula from line b until g.: then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it heals.
and if the breast sags down, and is softened due to its size as it does in women, then make two similar incisions on top, through two similar slits; so that one side holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until he is healed.
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it absorbs the residue and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses from arrow wounds
These abscesses that come underneath the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g.: And when all the pus within the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula. If the wound becomes pus-filled, then apply cautery as we have described earlier.
of bleeding from the artery
When an artery is torn and the skin above it is stuck, then there are often abscesses, and also swelling of the vein and abscess;
and if one knows this is due to an artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a constriction; and when it is due to the vein, then there is a defiant swelling;
and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groins and neck and many other places, and it is very large. Therefore one should avoid cautery with iron, and also that which is on the head, and in that which is inflammation of an artery, make a slit in the skin of the long one;
Therefore one should avoid cautery with iron, and also that which is on the head, and in that which is inflammation of an artery, make a slit in the skin of the long one; then operate on the arterioma, and carefully separate the artery from the nerves, so that it is uncovered;
then insert an awl under it and pierce it all the way to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in .2 inches, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
then point to the area between the two ligatures of an introducer so that the pus can flow out and the abscess be relieved;
then administer the cautery that bends the bowstring, until the ligature breaks; then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to a wound, you should stain your hand with what comes out of the abscess all over the skin, then push the needle underneath where you are holding in your hand, and pierce it through, and thread .i. doubled thread onto it, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, or one of .ij. parts with the .ij. threads;
and if you doubt that the thread will slip out, then put another needle onto the same thread underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in 4 places;
then cut the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the skin and leave what is tied;
then place on it a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also, as abscesses come to the artery and vein, so they come to the nerves when they are injured or through excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a kind of grievous abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it presents itself in various ways without pain;
and when it is pulled tightly, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely healed in the body, but under the heart;
and is silent from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor downward or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron; for it might cause constriction;
and those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it from the hook, and scrape it, then cut out the bone and sew up the wound, and dress it until it heals.
of large bumps hanging Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick leaves. There are small ones and very large ones.
I saw a man who had two of them on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white, had thin roots, and oozed moisture when cut into.
I copied and found in one weighing 18 ounces, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and of subtle root;
if the incision is made in the wide spatumile, and have at hand the cautery in fire. For when cutting there are often too great bloodletting, and if the blood does not stop, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made piece of woolen thread, and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
and then release it, and do not stop tightening the woolen thread until it cuts through the joint; and if the roots are large, then it fears to cut again in the same way for the belly, but you can certainly cut half of it,
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cover the thistle which is of a foul color and poor sense and milk regard.
For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer next.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or slit in an ulcer, and it is on the belly and some of them are in the bowels, as happens in other routings, or from blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and from the opening of the bowel, then the colour of the abscess is similar to the colour of the body, and it is a small thing without pain, and discharges from various openings. And if it is through the intestinal opening, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops back out, and then it comes back in, and sometimes it is serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the anus due to strong effort.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a small thing, and opens easily when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity;
and if it is due to wind, then there is swelling at the touch, and the procedure is to look whether the appearance is due to arterial blood or venous blood, or wind. If you should let the treatment proceed. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his belt and hold himself straight, then sign all around the abdomen; then command him to sit upright between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed all around the chest, then the top half of the abscess is cut, all the way to the large claw.
then the top half of the expanded abscess is cut, right up to the binding, and the finger is inserted, and the intestines are probed. if you find it bound by the string, then loosen it, and withdraw the intestines from the abdomen.
and if you find a boil, they take it at once, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery makes a sound contrary to your cutting, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and pierce the two needles into what you cut in a cross that you made when you were piercing;
then pull the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the opening until it drains, and the dead flesh comes out on its own; or you cut it when it is subtle and draining, then treat the wound as necessary, and cleanse the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and draining, then treat the wound as necessary, and cleanse the abscess as we have said; And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the area as it should be, and bind the wound.
of sores
We have already discussed the types of sores, how to treat them with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment. Now let us speak of sores that occur in the mouth, and great care must be taken in treating them. The ancients say that when a sore is in a place where it can be easily reached, as in the breast, armpit, or similar areas, it should be completely removed at the beginning. However, if the sore is large and old, you should not touch it, for I have never seen one healed, nor has anyone else before me.
And when the sore is in a place that can be easily reached, as we have said, the treatment is to first purging the patient of black bile; then let the wound bleed if it shows signs of repletion; then clean the wound and cut away the dead tissue from around the sore; then stop any bleeding with cauterization; finally, treat the wound further until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already discussed the types of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each type, as well as treatment with medication and with iron. Only two types should be treated with iron, tympanic and hipo-sarcic dropsy, as these are fatal conditions. Therefore, when treating a patient with dropsy, known as 'eclites', if the condition is mild and there are no other illnesses present, such as stomach issues or similar, then you must not use iron. However, if the patient is strong and healthy, and only has dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: Examine the patient carefully, and then press on the abdomen to force the fluid towards the lowest part of the body, near the genitals. Then, take a spathumile (a type of spear-like instrument) with a pointed tip, approximately two parts in length, but not so sharp that it punctures the intestines when inserted, nor so blunt that it doesn't pierce the skin.
Next, determine if the dropsy is located near the intestines. In that case, you should insert the instrument 3 fingers deep beneath the navel, on the right side. If the dropsy is due to liver disease, insert it on the left side, 3 fingers deep. If it is due to kidney issues, insert it on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie directly on the insertion point so that the fluid does not flow towards the weaker organ.
then pierce the skin with the instrument, and plug it in, and lift your hand over the entire spatumile between the skin and the cyst as when skinning to the thickness of a fingernail or in an oval shape; then pierce the cyst until the spatumile comes to the desired place, and this is where the water is, then draw it out, and plug this instrument from which the water comes: And it resembles a thin silver cane, and is made of bronze or lightweight brass, and has in its underside a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make to cut the pen:
at the top of which is the spout, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it drains directly onto the instrument; therefore empty half or a third, for if you empty more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the tool, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
but empty it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's pulse signifies, and then draw out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the hole in the cyst, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this manner; then restart the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small amount of water;
do this for a few days, and avoid bathing as long as it persists but with a little water. And if you doubt the ailment, leave a lot of water, then cure with burial sand or warm sand, and by much sweating or bathing, and in the sun, and by drinking; and cure with medicines that dry up until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the withdrawal of the water, as I said before.
from the congestion of the penis Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its proper place. So he should immediately pierce it with a very fine spear according to this form: then put into the foreskin a very fine plug of wood and ligature it and keep it so for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close. Those whose foreskin is small, if treated with the plug of wood as we have said, will widen. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are bleeders, for some are born with the foreskin at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate before they lift their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the incision falls in the middle, as it should be; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, then stop the flow of blood with a cautery, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the penis Many times these blisters come on the penis, and it is an unsightly appearance of pus; and there are harmful and harmless ones; therefore you should lance them with a very sharp knife, and clean and dry them thoroughly, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with fine ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is harmful, discolored and suppurating, then you should treat it with cautery. When you have cut it, and if the blister is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you should first remove the blister that is inside; and when it is sutured, cure the outside. For if you cure it all at once, the skin of the penis will not be secure and could be pierced, and blackness and corruption could come into his penis and scrotum; so cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and walnuts, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: Cauteries have two uses together, namely for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is腐敗and retracted, one should tie a cord around the penis and urinate among them; and when the skin is peeled back at the tip of the penis which happens in those who have not been circumcised, either due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument until the foreskin is loosened and the head of the penis is completely exposed.
And if it is a difficult thing to heal, then you must scrape it with a spatulum made of some soft wood at the tip of the penis and around the foreskin; then loosen gently in between, and place a thin layer of wet linen in cold water so that it does not peel back again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; however, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary for us to do our best and with the least harm possible.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the glans, and on many, and on all a new foreskin; then the skin would heal because there are two membranes, and sometimes one above and one below.
Now they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing of the glans there is no assurance that the tip of the member is cleansed; and in the cleansing of the nail sometimes the iron slips and ruins the work, and many times they grow without needing to be cleansed, and I have seen this.
From the cleansing that is done around the glans, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
Because when you press your hand, you should cut evenly throughout all of its fingers; but the thread should be well-tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you make it move in every way that you can; then you hold it straight between your hands, and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, or any of the instruments; then blow into the anus, and pull the rod upward until the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it underneath with another string; and hold it as a finger for two days by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and grip between the two ligatures, then lift the anus quickly and pull out the rod;
then you hold it straight between your hands, and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, or any of the instruments; then blow into the anus, and pull the rod upward until the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it underneath with another string; and hold it as a finger for two days by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and grip between the two ligatures, then lift the anus quickly and pull out the rod; then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the mucous; and put powder on top of the powder, a layer of glue made from a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it again until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for cleansing is such that the two heads are tense and sharp, and the heads are as large as the palm evenly:
the error of the purification is when the vein within bleeds upon incision; therefore you should stretch it with your thumbnail so that the vein becomes an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, hold it with tweezers and then cut it.
And if it bleeds for three days and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscesses are soothed and the skin is lightly scabs over; then cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm it in any way.
Heal therefore the site of such a wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it cuts too deeply into the foreskin and goes above it, it will not harm; then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
from retention of urine:
The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a foreign body, or similar objects, which we have mentioned in the classification.
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is caused by a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend forward at the knees with his feet placed on his back, and press his abdomen from above the back, and hold his breath as long as he can. This will force the neck of the bladder upwards, causing the stone to be expelled and allowing the urine to flow.
And if it does not work as described, and the patient feels great pain, then you should perform an extraction using a tool called a "syringe", which is crafted as follows: its tube should be made of thin silver, as light as a bird's feather; its length should be about a palm and a half, with a slender end.
And the technique for releasing the urine is to take a double thread, tie a small piece of wool or cotton at one end, and insert the other end into the syringe. Then trim the excess wool and push it all the way into the syringe, lubricate the syringe with oil, butter, or egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair. Lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water.
put the syringe gently into the penis, so that it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the testicles; then fill the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain coming to the empty space; this is not done according to this order if the person guiding it to where it should go is incorrect; then draw out the string through all the wool a little at a time, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;
then start over with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is gathered there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do this to all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and the hairless area where the medicine should be applied so that it blocks the urethra without causing pain, so that moisture can be extracted and pushed out when necessary.
And when you see your medicine going into the bladder, put the tip of the catheter into the urethra, and pull while pushing on the bladder, so that the moisture comes out to the catheter, and then push the catheter back in; then the moisture will go in, and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
This is the shape of the subtle catheter used for bladder catheterization: it is made like this:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is thicker; and below there is a 1-inch length of pipe; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you want to use to catheterize the bladder into it, then tie the two ends of the pipe together with a thin double thread, and heat the moisture on the fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra, then pull your hand up against the bladder gently until all the moisture goes in, and the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make .i. circle, and punch it around with a hole; then put .i. strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have already said in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have told the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens most often to children, and it is a sign that the water goes out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and they open their eyes widely, and feel pain in their penis, and can urinate many times, and then become constipated; and many of these have hernia; and healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and is middle-aged in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces which is in the intestines. For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and raise him up and move him about from below so that the stone descends into the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then have him sit between your hands, his hands underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then examine it and feel around inside it;
if you feel the stone in the cavity, then hurry to cut upon the stone. And if it does not drop out with the touch all at once, then moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger if the patient is a young child; and insert it into the urethra, and feel around for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it up toward the neck of the bladder; then press against your finger, and push the stone out to where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and tell the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision will be made; then insert the spatulum tightly, for this is its purpose:
And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight over the stone, and both hands should be on the anus, and the incision should be across the navel so that it is wide by force, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
by chance the pressure of the fingers on the anus causes it to emerge without effort; and you will find that there is a stone with angles and edges: it is cut out; and there is also one which is underneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose extraction is easy.
For those therefore in which there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must grip it with tweezers which have a file at the tip, to draw out the stone so that it does not slip away; or you insert beneath it a very thin instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot grip it in this way, widen the opening slightly and if the stone is uncovered, draw it out with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then press it out, and the smaller ones after, if there are several. And if it is very large, it must be cut, and a larger incision made. For two things happen to the patient: they may die, or the urine may flow out where the sutures cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to draw it out, or break it into pieces with tweezers, until you extract it piece by piece.
and when you have finished your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-anoint the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound and congealing of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is known in such a way that it passes with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst;
then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid it in every way you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, to tie the two thighs together, and assemble the medicine on the spot.
And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the penis, lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment I have described before, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for not cutting it with this treatment. I have already tried this.
Take an iron needle according to this shape and let it have three angles bent into a tinder:
Then take a thread and wind it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the needle into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle in your hand inside the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis. Then it is shattered at once, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of anything that obstructs it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then split the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of women's stones
Sometimes stones become lodged in women's bodies, and if this happens, the treatment is difficult due to three reasons: first, the woman might be a virgin; second, one cannot find an experienced woman who will examine her, especially if she is chaste.
The third reason is that one cannot find an experienced female practitioner in this art of medicine; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, requiring a deeper incision, which is more dangerous.
And if you cannot find an experienced female practitioner, then you should seek out a wise mid-wife and, if you cannot find one, then choose a subtle and wise woman who understands the anatomy of women; and present her with a sharp instrument that is smooth and well-polished, or a piece of bone, and command her to do what you instruct regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin; then she should press her finger into her vagina and feel for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it with her finger, and he should recommend that she presses her left hand firmly against her bladder.
If she finds it, then she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
then push the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone is sharp enough to cut through the flesh, until the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and smooth, others are large and rough, long and round, and have various textures. Know their likenesses so as to know what to expect.
And if the urine is dark, then apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the color has faded; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have some assistants that I have mentioned to you before to assist you in your task;
and if the blood vessels are cut, and it is from the artery that has been severed, then apply powder to the area and press firmly with bandages and compression, and do not loosen them again, and leave the stone where it is and do not try to remove it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place healed, return to your work until the stone is out.
of carneous hernia
Aquous effusion is nothing else but the collection of moisture or white pus, which is under the heart of the testicles, and contains the egg; and is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the cause of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many variations in color: sometimes a declining color towards jaundice, or a red without color, or black, or watery white, and there are more varieties.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have described, then there are red spots, .i. a little long like the shape of an egg, and does not appear on the testicles, because there is moisture all around them.
And if it has moisture in the scrotum, then there are red spots with part of an egg, and because of this, one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, he feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all around the entrance with a probe, as the form is described above. According to this, then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside.
According to this, then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and have a lot of coverings under him;
then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles;
then take the spatule and cut the skin of the testicles from its length until you reach the scrotum, and make the incision straight while cutting the skin of the testicles until you reach the white fascia, and carefully remove the skin according to your ability.
then pierce the white fascia with a needle into a large opening, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and let the fascia close up again; and do not touch the testicle, but only the fascia. Cut it all the way around gently, just under the skin, for if you do not cut it well enough, the water will come back.
And if the water jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished the work of the fascia; then unite the two lips of the skin of the testicle with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you should ligate the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the testicle all the way around at the suspension, and draw out the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is gathered into two parts together, know that they are two branches; then press the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash the blood away and put on the wound soft lamb's wool moistened in rosewater.
and put on another piece of lamb's wool moistened in wine and oil, and place over the two branches, and put on top a doubled-over linen cloth, and bind it all with a ligature according to this form.
Then take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this shape, and have them sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one piece pressed against the bottom up to the back, and the other to the part of the armpit; and the other two tips on the two sides, and have all the binding tied in a loop on the breeches.
And sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of an iron knife, and it is that you press a small, thin knife against the skin of the branches, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed;
take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the syphilis at its roots, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the scrotum in all ways that you can, until you extract everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicles; and know that this operation is safer; and pay attention to blood flow from the incision, and to swelling after surgery;
and if anything causes a contrary effect, such as a hot abscess or blood flow or something else, then treat what is causing the contrary effect according to what has been previously said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then administer a piercing, as I have told you, and when you are well-assured through the signs that we have mentioned that the pus is laid down,
let the patient sit on a high chair; then pierce the abscess at the lower part, all through to the spasm, and put the bore into the long part of the body; and let the holes be wide enough that all the pus can run out.
then put cotton on the wound, and bandage it, and leave it to let the remainder of the pus run out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
And if the white film does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must put a tube or the instrument used to treat dropsy patients into it, as mentioned earlier; and widen the wound a little, and know that the pus will return, and collect around again after six months or so, and when it has collected as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of an abscess in the testicles
Know that in the dissection of this nerve there are many possible arrangements, because of which it seems to me better to leave it as it is.
And I will tell you about the procedure and the appearance of the abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially from the groin; and there are many types of cases.
This is to know about excess sour and cold, which is spread in the groins, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not hurt at all, and it is a serious abscess;
and sometimes there are grayish-colored abscesses that are fearful and hollow, and of pus color, and sometimes they come from a burst artery or vein swelling.
When it is from a burst artery, it is recognizable by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Those who are affected by inflammation of the vein are known by their appearance and the sensation when touched with the fingers.
and anyone can accurately judge by these signs, and by others which will be described. And you should press the head of the testicles, then the yolk will rise to the top, and the white part will become firm, and the scrotum will be released from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already broken with these colors, then you must therefore break the egg and press it.
and if there is air in the syringe, or within the vessels, you must release all that air and fill the cup smoothly.
And if the egg is in a rear position, you must cup it all and extract the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the apoplexy of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a cherry, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans painfully when he urinates;
and the treatment for this disease is also dangerous just like the one before.
And yet we will tell you about its operation according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your hands. then take all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them, and extend them firmly;
then cut through the vessels with a sharp knife widely and in the right place,
and then cut off the skin on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
then I insert a needle where there is .a. double thread, and tie it to the first place where the thread came out, and tie it directly to the other end; then they cut in a straight line according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as the others, or if any blood vessels are torn that irrigate one of the testicles;
because there is no harm in this, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one should milk the testicles from all the vessels; so that the veins do not lose their strength through the incision of the vessels, drying out and unable to help themselves.
from the rot of the sinus The origins of this disease are through the incision that comes to the sinus, or the extension over the belly in the part of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that rot to one of the testicles;
and this rot is in the sinus, or from its extension, and these two ways come from causes: from percussion, or jumping, or crying out, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from an extension of the syphilis, are that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because syphilis pushes inwards on the intestines.
And the signs are that when it is from a section of syphilis, it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in various places under the skin, and this is due to the output of the intestines and the body's defense against syphilis.
And sometimes the intestines descend with it, and is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, from which one should flee.
And the way to do this operation is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into his hand inside the wound if he can; then hold him firmly by the neck between your hands and gently loosen the bowels;
then cut the skin of the scrotum from above, and carefully cut all around the testicles; then insert hooks into the sides of the wound according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out.
then scrape the skin underneath the hair on the scalp, until the tough, white scurf is uncovered all over;
then insert your index finger into that which follows the scalp, in between the white scurf underneath the hair, and between the second scurf;
and separate that which is behind the eye, and between the second scurf; and then move your right hand into the scalp, and hold the white scurf upwards in your left hand, and lift the eye all of the scurf towards the neck; and instruct the assistant to stretch the arm upward and loosen what is tight behind the elbow;
and feel with your fingers if there is any hard, white, membranous substance involved, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below;
then take a needle and some thread, and insert it into the rear part of the syphilis, which is under the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then grasp the shoulder which appears through the threads, until there are four threads; then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the syphilis, which we have said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the head with threads, and tie them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, so that no abscess comes; and then apply the quick-lime according to the first long line for two days, and after these two lines, leave the castor oil which is under the skin of the testicles for as long as it takes;
and then all the other according to the roundness that the testicles carry; then cut into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
then apply soft woolen cloth in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then use the line that we have described. And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after an incision, out of fear of a blood flow.
For this often happens, and leave the ligature in place until it bites into the wound; and if it is slow to bite, then apply a hot poultice, and put on what we have mentioned, until it bites.
Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.Et s’il aduient que li blans syfac ne puisse a l’incision, si doit on li faire une fente sus la plaie et mettre li sel de mer dedanz, et le sel absorbe li mal qui est en la plaie.
of carnous hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the remedy for a broken vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above gently from below.
Then cut into it, and cure the abscess of the one who opens it, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there is a rupture into the veins, as we have said, and it opens up; and no intestines fall out into the rectum, and if anything does fall out, it is a small amount, and it can be repaired at any time.
and yet if he remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer will fester until the intestines burst;
and this happens because of the extension of the ulcer which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen open;
and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and the patient lies down on his back between his hands, then covers the wound with a poultice of the size of two fists;
and then extract the cyst which is under the skin, then take a thread and place it over the visible area of the cyst;
and press it deeply into the abdomen, then tie off the two visible areas of the cyst on top of the thread, and tie one and then the other;
then pull out the end of the thread, and do not cover or extend the cyst or anything else, as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal worms;
then treat it like any other wound. And when you tie off the threads, if the cyst and wound are cleaned and healed,
The syphilitic is constrained, and has no appearance in the rut; and the cautery is better in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the contents within are softened, and it is milky in appearance. When one wishes to treat this, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then unite the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, or up to four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed, removing the stitches.
of chastisement
You know that castration is prohibited in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the owner knows how to respond when asked about it, and also knows how to perform the procedure; and the other is because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as pigs, sheep, goats, and others. I say then that castration is done in two ways: by cutting or by crushing. In the method where we crush, we have the animal sit in warm water until their testicles are soft and dangling; then we grab them with our hand until they become limp and we can no longer feel them. For the castration of a ram: you must hold the animal down, and press the skin of the testicles against your left palm; then tie off the scrotum, and cup each testicle 3 times as you have scalded them; and I leave some pus and the fine membrane covering the testicles; this method of castration is preferable to the one done by crushing, because with crushing, something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire sex; then treat the wound until it heals.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types as men: one is where between the 2 testicles, there is also an opening like a woman's vagina, with hair, and sometimes they urinate through it. And the other type is in women, who have on their groin a penis and 2 testicles. The treatment for both types is to cup the swollen area and treat it as any other wound; but for the second type of man, where urine escapes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the testicles
of the testicles Tentigene is a growth attached to the natural part, so much so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure. You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or fingers, and lightly scrape it; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then cure the other cure until it is healed; and there is another growth that arises at the mouth of the malice, and use it, and by chance it will come out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". So you should scrape the tentigene, as we have said, and cure it until it is healed.
of Erratic
Erratic is when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is due to a growth, or a subtle or thick discharge, and it is caused by an ulcer in the vagina, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever; and it affects conception and childbirth, and may cause abortion; and its nature is known through examination of the vulva. If the discharge is apparent, it should be touched with your fingers or a piece of cloth. If it is a subtle discharge, and it is close to the two lips, then you should hasten and open them: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then the two lips will open, so that the subtle discharge is exposed, and the ulcer will be covered; then take some wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the ulcer; and let the woman lie down for a while each day, so that it does not heal. And if the discharge is due to a growth, you should scrape it according to this method, if it is not an abscess. For with an abscess in the vagina, one should not touch it to cause it to break.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are opened veins which normally don't bleed, and when hemorrhoids become old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in a previous section. I stated that both hemorrhoids and thrombosed piles, when they are fully formed in the anus and do not bleed, cannot be cured by iron instruments. Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt and can be treated. Therefore, one should first place the patient in a cold room, then cut the hemorrhoid with tweezers and pull out its roots; then apply powder to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar substances; then tie her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gall nuts, and similar ingredients, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice to be applied to her back. If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on her back and breasts without using iron instruments; then take lamb's wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood bark infused in old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has burst, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it should be treated as I have described for thrombosed piles; then treat it until it heals.
of abscesses in the anus
There are many types of abscesses that can occur in the anus, such as sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as other diseases which I have described in a previous section. Therefore, I will now describe the hot abscess that occurs in the anus, which is not among those that are caused by bowels. If you see that the abscess is soft at the beginning of its appearance, and there is fever and heat, and it turns red when you can examine it, then do not rush to pierce it, but let it be for a while until the pain subsides. Then, make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs on which he can lean, and support his back and straighten his legs, and tie his feet together; then suck the anus towards the right side, and insert the instrument that opens the anus, through which comes the pus, and feel the depth of the anus so that the instrument does not go in further than it should, and do not hurt the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloth so that the instrument does not irritate; then put the tip of the instrument inside and apply pressure. When the abscess bursts, and the pus is discharged by hand, treat the wound with a soft sponge soaked in rose oil, or in dry vert oil; then put the sponge outside the wound, at the bottom of the anus, and put something over the anus and the perineum, such as clean linen moistened with water or malva flowers that have been cooked. Then treat it for two days with suitable ointment until it heals; sometimes, lift the anus and the wound using a clyster of water and honey, then water infused with lily roots and aristolochia, and then return to the ointment. If the wound is closed in the anus, then avoid using iron instruments, but treat it as I have described earlier.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs: when you see a woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the air, then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids by good cleansing. But if it comes in any other way, it does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes out on its feet, or outside the body at the shoulder, chest, or belly, or near the navel; sometimes it is turned upside down on its neck, and in many other bad positions. It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and cunning in these matters, wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should assist.
If the child comes out through the head in a natural way, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a low stool or have women hold her up; and let her drink a cup of rose water in which has been cooked oil or fenugreek, and then let the midwife put between her lips the small spatula of which I will now give the form: and split the afterbirth, and scrape its nail until the moistness which is within runs out; and press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then one must cleanse the woman with a clyster of fenugreek mucilage with sixment oil; then let her drink and sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out. And if both hands come out, then you must gently pull them in little by little; and if they cannot enter, then have the woman sit on a low seat, and lift her feet upward; then stand the seat upon the ground, and let someone hold her up so that she does not slump over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grasp the hands at the knuckles which are mentioned before, and pull out the child, and reset the dislocation in the same way.
of the child's exit through its feet When the child comes out through its feet, it should be pushed upward; and then turn it bit by bit, until it is straightened;
then grab one of the feet and stretch it little by little.
When it jumps up to the armpits, if he commands it to grab, and makes it sneeze with a condiment; if it jumps out, God willing.
And if it does not jump out as we have said, then draw it back little by little, until it is according to its natural shape. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of sixesment, and gum dissolved, and grind everything together in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the woman's private parts then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, make a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and lightly squeeze her belly, for the child will jump out now. of the child's birth onto his knees When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little;
of the birth of the child, which comes out, wide, one hand at a time We must find a way to bring back the hand: if we cannot bring it back, then have the woman rise and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
then bring the mustard that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child comes out.
of the child's emergence onto his neck, and have spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back I must that he grab her hand, then rock him gently back and forth, and hold him lightly;
and when it is even, then place on the muscle a poultice of altus and oil, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little;
and when you have done this, then let her sit on a chair, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn. in the same way with all the afterbirth
in the same way with all the afterbirth When it comes out in this way with all the afterbirth, then catch the afterbirth with your fingers, as long as the moisture is expelled;
and if the child can stretch out over his face and neck, the mother will not be able to retain it, and the child will die.
then place the child inside, as you ought, and instruct the woman to hold on for a while.
of the twin's birth You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Twins are a rare occurrence, and they do not live long if they do.
I know that they are multiplied and separated by the placenta that divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they are born naturally like one baby, as we have said.
And if they are very serious, then the treatment as we have said, and be subtle with the patient, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and act thus as it benefits their health. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb: one or two, three or four, five or six, seven or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious Sage,
and it is necessary that the doctor knows all of this, because by chance a similar thing could happen to him; then act according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a miscarriage or abortion, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no bleeding, and you must use your hands to treat her; if you must know whether the woman is of sound health, and does not have an accident or fear of death;
if the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down and her legs raised;
and the minister the ointment of 10 parts, or she be bound to the bed so that she not be treated for the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils with myrrh and fennel and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and myrrh; then gently tap them, then put them in the water where they will boil the joints that are suitable for this,
and be careful that the child is not dressed so that it falls on its head; if he catches the joints in his eyes or throat or mouth or under his beard or in his armpit or near his ribs,
and if the descent is on the feet, then catch him by the ankle and the middle of the ribs;
and he should dye the needle with his right hand, and place the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the needle into one of the places we have mentioned, so that it reaches the hollow space;
then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they should be moved equally from one side to the other so that it may come out, and the needles should bite in order to hold it, as it is shown in the picture:
And if some of it remains, then anoint the fingers with oil, and rub them in that part, and draw out the other part.
and if none of it remains, then put this ointment higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out;
then press down on the joint of the sole or the instep, and likewise you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or he has an acute pain gathered in his head, you must push the spiny spiderwort between your fingers and press on the head to extract the water. Or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapters that follow this one.
and thus, the fetus is born with a large head naturally; and then pulls out the bones with tongs,
and if the head pops out and is forced, so that it splits, until the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it open into pieces as small as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
And if the swelling is on his feet, then the pulse is weak and the breath comes easily.
And if he is constipated in his belly or buttocks, then you should use a suppository wrapped in a cloth. and open the belly or anus so that the moisture flows out;
and if other members are frozen, and the head remains, if he puts his hand in the bottom of the wound and pulls it out to the mouth of the wound; then he puts in .1 or 2 fingers, and pulls it out;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, then one must administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and use warm water that is softening and moistening.
And if the fetus is on its side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about the living child;
and if one has no power, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if it is administered to those we have said about abscesses that come in the sea;
and if there is bleeding, let it be restrained with water, and let other remedies be administered.
And I saw a woman whose child had been dead in her womb; then another was sewn upon it and the other died. After a long time she got an abscess on her breast, which swelled up so much that it broke open and began to discharge.
I was called to the priest, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong吸引plaster, and out came a bone, and then after a few days some more. I was very merveilled, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and put my hand on her bones until the woman was in a better state; and for a long time afterwards the woman remained like that, occasionally dislocating slightly from her place;
and I have not recorded this chapter until now because when the masters encounter something strange, they know how to provide aid.
to bring the dislocation back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is bound in books; and at two turns around two shoulders of the two lines. Nevertheless, let the horns be more subtle on the constrictor, and be made of boxwood or ebony;
and let the mouth of the post be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit apart, and in length a palm and a half; and in between the two sides are two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two settings are driven into the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of tongs; and has two heads two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see the wound open to all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then press together the two incisions in the armpit, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between his thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
These instruments are all decorated and have many variations in appearance; and when the surgeon has prepared them, his work is all the faster and more efficient for it, and it is also more impressive to his patients because of their variety.
Do not despair about the instrument that you have not yet prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with some incense, and hold her hands over her mouth and nose. And if she vomits, all the better.
If not, take a pot and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as tansy, fennel, aniseed, chamomile, and pennyroyal.
All of these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire. Then put one end into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the woman.
and let it sit until the vapors enter the disease; then make it sneeze, as we have said. Then remove the pus gently. And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the patient to wet their left hand in oil of asses milk or in almice, and then she should wash it in the natural way,
and find the pus; and when she has found it, she should squeeze it and stretch it out little by little gently, so that the disease is not dislodged; but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will then come out and be dislocated.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have discussed the treatment of sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not healed by all that we have said, then beware of pulling;
but it is necessary to tie what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with four-fold ointment;
if she can, she will go out; but nevertheless, when she defecates, there comes a bad smell from the stomach and head, and it makes her ill.
Therefore, you should use appropriate smoke: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for retained flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is made of glass, resembling a cane, with a narrow head in the nature of things, and wide shoulders above the fire;
and the smoke from the charcoal, and the moth until it is destroyed, and start another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born without their foundation pierced; instead, they have a thin, delicate membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger, not with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to tear it;
then apply a poultice of warm wine and oil, then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, then insert a peg of wooden splint and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go in the chamber pot.
And sometimes this stopping of bleeding comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden splint.
of the fistula in ano Fistulas which come from under the anus are nodular, and grow larger than those that come from near the anus, or in the space of two parts.
if there is one fistula or multiple; and when this nodule is old, it opens, and usually emits a white or thin pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out through defecation or flatulence when the patient expels gas, and sometimes a bit jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach the hip joint, and the scrotum.
And thus one knows a fistula that is constant at the anus, and does not discharge: and you should press your index finger into the anus, and push a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no crookedness.
And if it has crookedness, then you should insert a thin tent of lead or a horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge, nor wind, nor pus, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce; then hurry to heal.
And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, and the urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it pierces to the hip joint, then there will be a bleeding vein up to that spot. If there is no twisting and the pain is consistent, then it will remain as it is, and medicine or poultices will not help.
and with these persian fistulas there is no cure but hard work, and folly of the fools who meddle in them.
In one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your finger there.
and if it pierces through the skin, then you know it is pierced; if it does not heal on its own, one cannot cure it.
One can still heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the helper who does this, he must heat the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and he inserts it all the way into the fistula as far as the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that the charred flesh is burnt, which looks like an owl's feather;
and then treat it with moist bandages soaked in butter, until the burnt flesh comes off; then treat it with ointment that softens and heals.
If it is thus healthy, that is good. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent is inserted and does not penetrate to the bottom which is at the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of charcoal or of styptic, and you see the fistula in that which follows the covering of the heart; if you scrape at the beginning of the fistula, and then plug it with cotton before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent;
and the tent will be removed, and then it will fall out; then remove the charcoal that has been formed into a small ball, and nothing will remain.
And if the pus comes out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For fire cautery brings together two things: that is, the scorching of these joined parts and the stemming of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then, treat the wet tents with butter or ground-up matter until the places ooze, and let the fire burn into the flesh.
Then, treat the wound of swelling veins with hot, dry poultices.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the fundament, and is distant from the body, put your finger into it, and probe it.
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the tissue or the membrane, or it is about to burst, then there is no hope but through the administration of one of the three remedies:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, insert tent and cure it as before.
And do not go too deep, so that you cover the tissue that holds the fundament, and let the evacuation come through there as it will. then heal, as we have said;
then heal, as we have said; by chance you will be healed, or you will remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either by a tent or by some pointed instrument; then mend that broken bone in the wound as best you can;
then study how to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the part above the foundation: so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes they are made into fistulas according to this method: it is when you push the tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the foundation next to the skin above. Take a tent, pierced at its tip, in accordance with this shape: And he inserts a twisted thread through it, and pushes the tent all along the thread into the fistula until it reaches its tip.
If it is pierced in the margin within the foundation, then pull out the thread from that hole as you would put your finger into the foundation.
And draw the head with a thread, and bring together the two heads of the shoulder, and tighten them one against the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it sometimes, as long as the threads cut through the flesh that is between two;
then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage so tightly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spiny spatumile, whose fistula they open, is very sharp and pointed on one side; and not on the other, so that one should not bandage it too tightly, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes they burst and bleed. There can be one or more of them, and they can be inside the anus or at its opening; but those that are outside have less moisture.and sont grans et pletives, et sunt en grant dolour.
and sometimes they burst and release a little water or blood, and their color is like that of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you should instruct the patient to go to the toilet and push until the hemorrhoids come out, and then they will heal; if you are in a hurry, hold it with tongs or between your fingernail and thumb, then pull it out at the root.
and if the nails cannot hold it because of moisture, they should take it with a napkin or piece of cotton or camel's hair; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder some hot powdered medicines on top of it as if they were a cautery; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauteries, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the fundament cannot exit, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it may exit clearly.
and if the patient strains, and the thread comes out of the fundament, then the treatment is light. And you should grab them with your nail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron.
If you need to perform sutures in this way: take a twisted thread and thread it through a needle, then pull the thread from the top, and push the needle through from the other side, and then bring both ends of the thread underneath the needle. and if it is wide, tightly wind the thread, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw off the excess blood;
then place over the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate, and place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to keep still;
and then let him defecate, and when he has finished, cleanse the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
of dryness of the anus or rectum Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
You should cut the skin at the tip of a spatula or your nail, so that it does not get moist. Then treat it until it is dry and healed as it should be.
If it cannot heal, then restart the treatment with greater force than before, until it heals well and is scoured. then treat it until it heals.
trembling Antors is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep;
and sometimes the antors cause trembling, and it feels like death, and it comes over the whole body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a cane of a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place the feather on the vein, until the purple circle covers the vein all around. Then turn your hand along the feather until you feel all around the vein, and push it in deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
And if you can, make a cane of brass or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin beneath and broad above.
And if you can, cauterize the vein, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
of the shape of the enema Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten and hammered copper; and sometimes they are made from these small and large instruments, according to those who use them.
Those that are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The shape of the enema, whether small or large, is placed on top, or the belly is bound in this way:
and it has a hernia where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts the medicine in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
and it has between each opening an inch of space, then tie in these holes a strong thread of twisted thread in ten or so turns around, and gather the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse; and this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with a catheter of oil, or egg white, or something similar, then plug it gently.
Then the minister squeezes his two hands together, as far as he can, then pulls out the catheter and releases the patient's legs from the wall,
and if the medicine wants to come out, he should press as hard as he can; and if he sleeps for a night, it is even better.
And if you catheterize him for diarrhea, and the medicine rushes to come out, then he should be given more until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child.
This is the form of the subtle enema that should be used when the skin is stretched tight:
of wounds
We have already spoken of wound treatment in the section on surgery; now we will speak of treatments using hands and medicine, according to the situation.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
The objects that make wounds are stones that strike, and sword and knife cuts, or spear, staff, or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the places in the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar organs;
and I will tell you how to cure each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because their memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should be careful if it is from a blow by stone or similar objects, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you fear an abscess is forming quickly: then have the patient bleed from the head itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
and let the patient avoid excess wine and rich foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat meat;
and place a bandage on the wound, if a hot abscess has formed, wet cotton in rose oil only, or in wine with styptic properties.
and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and not moved by air, the powder I will describe shortly.
and if the wound has been moved by the air, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that from a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with a ligature, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be reached, and holds only by a little, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not near the bone, then cut out all of the pus, and pour it out, then cure it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which is bleeding profusely, and it cannot be staunched by medicine, then cut off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then straighten it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; you should put this powder on so that it burns until the pain has subsided.
And the recipe for the powder is: take one part incense, two parts dragon's blood, three parts quicklime, and mix it all together finely. and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins together without any blood loss.
and then bandage it well, leaving it bound unless it swells; for the medication is not removed until it has healed.
And sometimes one should only cauterize with chalk, when they don't have incense or dragon's blood, but as long as the cautery moves the wound.
And if the cautery has moved the wound, mix in some of this powder with it;
but apply to it some digestive ointments, or barley flour made from water and honey, until it becomes soft; then treat other diseases until he is cured.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
of a wound on the neck
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or arteries are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let it heal, and not put anything restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw. And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But use warm medicines, such as washings in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washings also in lukewarm water, and other moist stones according to this method.
And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is torn and full of bowels, then pierce them higher up.
and if an artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then ligature it, and close it up, and cauterize it as needed;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the nerves, and the windpipe is protected, through which the food goes, if you cut the nerve on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then gently stretch it, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with cleansing ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then you want it; and if there are bone fragments, pull them out as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound can heal. and then open and clean the wound;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I described earlier. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether there are any wounds in the head of the patient: know therefore that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh and bleeding profusely at first, then do not apply the powder or ligature it to stop the bleeding immediately. and let the patient rest and recover. but I apply an attractive ointment and bind it .ii. times a day;
and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days; if there is no spasm, nor tremor of the heart, nor twitching of the limbs; and when you see the bones in good alignment, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is still discharge, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it then as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the front or back, then treat it as described above;
if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is deep in the bone, and has broken off pieces, then probe the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, to lighten the extraction;
and for other wounds in other members, the judgement is as we have said.
of rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, pass out through an opening;
and the healing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger one;
because one puts the intestines back in more easily when they are warm;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more with pins,
and therefore it is better to cauterize the wound, and therefore one cauterizes the intestine in its place along with the others.2
And know that hernia of the abdomen occurs according to .iiij. ways:
the .ij. common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
and the stitching of other wounds of the body, and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more appropriate with abdominal surgery, and I will describe each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small, and no intestine protrudes, and it is easy to fix, which can be done in one of two ways:The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: moisten a sponge or soft cloth with lukewarm water only, or you cook in water squinting and cypress and spike and rose intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes this wine is restraining, and it is better to vomit to deflate.
And when you see the swelling leaving, then boil the intestines in water or alt and bad wine are cooked, for through this the entrance is constricted to a small space;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is bloodletting rather than cutting, which one should not cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if you cut into the curve and out again, and take note of the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if you put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you can, for this is useful.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts put the understanding in that the ruptured part be higher than the other;
and so you must apply what I say to large and small wounds.
For small wounds, use whatever tools you have available:
then have at hand .i. pair of forceps that can grip the wound all around its edge, and bring together the edges; and this is the common method of sewing.
and this is the common method of sewing. You will thread one or more needles, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a distance of about a finger's width from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with a strong thread through it; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the thread,
then draw it through with a double thread around the needle from one part, then gather the two heads of the wound together smoothly,
and then leave .I. space, and I pierce with another needle; then pull the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is closed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for the thin needles pierce all the flesh, and the very thick ones cannot enter well; therefore they should be medium-sized;
and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
that they do not cut and open the wound before the scab forms;
then they cut the heads of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient while sleeping, and they put tents or bandages on the needle heads to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitch is common, and it involves joining the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound with one strong thread using a needle; and when you have pierced all these pieces together [in a circle],
and when you have pierced all these pieces together [in a circle], then remove the needle from where you started, in the same way that one sews clothes;
and insert spacing between each stitch the thickness of a little finger;
this stitch severs the man,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly,
which he had received from a knife, and the wound was more than a palm-width in size, and the intestines protruded well over two palms in length,
and was the wound in the middle of his belly. I brought him the intestines after they had been outside for 24 hours.
and the wound healed within 15 days, and he recovered.
And those who saw him believed that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and put cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and thread through the upper part just to the inside;
when it has pierced the skin straight-on, then put in the needle where you see the vein or where it is easiest to thread.
and have it pierce through from another angle on the inside all the way to the outside;
and the technique for this sewing is that you sew as a leatherworker sews a hide, and leaving one end of the vein uncovered on one side and then covering it up on the other, until the sewing is finished.
The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly,
is to bring together the two parts naturally and smoothly, applying one edge of the wound to the other, in such a way that:
they pierce an needle or sharp object into the proximity of the wound, and only pierce that spot, and leave the two chins of the syringe; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside just into the inside, as two chins of the syringe;
then pierce one and the other from the outside just into the inside, in two other chins of the syringe that are on the other side;
and this is the mother of all sutures, and the most common.
Galen says these words, and some testify to it,
one should sew the belly with .ii. needles, each with its own thread;
and one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and know that when the rupture is in the stomach, the incision is worse than other places in the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound all in blood, before the fire has moved it, if it returns to the intestines, and the gut; then put on the powder charm.
if it returns to the intestines, and the gut; then put on the powder charm. and if it burns the skin, put on some ointment that is available until the wound heals; and cut off the thread and tie up the sutures, and the myrrh; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
and if you do not have medicine, then apply old cotton, as soon as it begins to drip downward. and move it .14. times a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause infection in the principal members, if you need to moisten a light wool in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, and this happens frequently, then administer enemas of warm red wine, especially if the swelling extends to the intestines;
and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread is cut from the wound, it draws it back also as the intestine does, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned red or black, then you must tie the area that has turned black so that no blood flow comes from it, because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two shoulders hanging from the part under the wound until they are relieved of the extraction when the nails drop, and the wound heals.
of the road of boiling
When the intestines are pierced, and the wound is small, one can repair it in some ways,
because I saw a man who was pierced in the belly with a lance;
and was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and from it came evacuations and wind.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to apply poultices until it was healed and the wounds closed.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient had discomfort in his belly;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. and there was no harm, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take a large needle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, put it on top of both lips,
then put another splint in after in the same way, until the wound is completely bound up;
and bandage the wound. If they are absorbed into the intestines and do no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread which is very thin, and then bind to the head of this thread a fine, twisted linen thread; then thread the needle with the thread, and sew up the wound, and reset it in its place;
and this method of sewing up a dislocated joint is not without risk, according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great internal veins, there is no healing without subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called a "fistula". and especially when it is deep and narrow.
And a fistula is according to the green-looking hard and white nodules, where one does not feel pain, and is also shaped like a bird's feather;
sometimes it is clear and thin, sometimes thick; sometimes small, sometimes large;
and I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no scabs, it comes only from one of the eight causes;
that is, through the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, that does not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much bile; or the body is emaciated, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because of the nature of the region, digestion is late, health is delayed, and it swells by nature. or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
You should know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or to the eye, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the sides, or to the spine in the back, or to any joint in the hands or feet;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And all fistulas that are of this nature are of painful healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you are confident in the cure, and you see it, take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
if the fistula is crooked, then seek a subtle needle of lead. because lead bends with the crookedness;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot pierce it well with needles, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
for moisture flows from one orifice to another and purifies it;
then make the wound bleed as much as you can so that you may know if there is bone or nerve involved, and examine it thoroughly;
and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and once you know the exact location, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the ways I have told you, and the cup according to what I have told you.
or in any of the ways I have told you, and the cup according to what I have told you. and remove for the rot and decay that is within them; and then the dressing as long as it is healed,
and if the fistula is very deep in a straight line, you must cup it as deeply as you can, then I apply wet bandages as a treatment for an abscess, and tie them to the top of the fistula.
then I apply wet bandages as a treatment for an abscess, and tie them to the top of the fistula. until the medication corrodes the excess matter that remains at the bottom.
and then I apply warming ointments to healthy flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this method, then he should be cauterized as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off. If a vein or nerve causes you distress in your limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut it until the corruption is completely removed, then treat it with salves until it is healed;
and if it is not healthy, and return bow as before, know that you have not gone to the spring:
uncover and desire as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus without pain, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other way, then let it heal through natural healing;
and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with tweezers, if one extracts it with a suitable instrument for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, he must pull them all out, not leaving any behind;
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, cut and dry, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put on the wound something causing suppuration, and let it fester around the bones,
and then they will have the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, if you merely treat the corruption until all the darkness is removed, then heal the wound;
and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches down to the bone; then cut away and cover up everything down to the corruption, then heal it until it is closed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg; so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from something that entered the body,
until the matter came to the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it;
but they looked at their madness so much that the abscesses opened, and they poured out a lot of matter and became a fistula, and many openings came from which all the body fluids flowed;
and many looked at it for more than two years, but there was no wise man in the art of medicine who could heal it;
until I was called to see it, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated; and what runs through the openings of the body with great speed; and the bodies of young men became red and had a yellow colour.
I set up a tent at one of these openings, and then examined all the openings,
and found that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
I therefore hurried and struck one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone. And found it rotten and pierced, and the rot extended to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and I believed that there was no other rot other than what I had taken out;
And began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
and then begin again, and expose the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I cut it off, and I took pains to seal up the place;
but I could not until I had copied around a palm of the bone, and I left it for all its length, then I restored it with medicine; and it was healed and sealed firmly,
and there is no need to repeat the treatment except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure it, and out of fear that he might die. For despite the bloodletting, he was fully healed,
For despite the bloodletting, he was fully healed, and in the place of the bone a hard lump grew, and he was in good health with no harm or discomfort anywhere, nor any difficulty moving.
and you are the head, so you treat the corruption underneath, and uncover the skin above where you see it growing, so that the growth does not blister the skin; and place a burning brand or a hot table under the bone to heat up and cover the corrupted flesh; and one must burn as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and burn again another time.
And if the bone is broken, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, disclose the flesh all over; then insert a burning brand beneath it,
and then cut from one side of the corruption to the other, and let the cut be as long as the corruption itself, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut through the joint, and cut into the bone on the other side of the joint;
and if the dislocation is in the continuation of the two joints, then cover it with a bandage;
and if the dislocation is at the knuckle of the hand or the foot, then it is very serious, but you should still inquire about the dislocation, how it appeared to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful that the veins or nerves do not cause any harm to you;
and you shall know that there are many types of saws and knives to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason one must prepare an instrument for each type of work;
and you shall know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this craft, and witnesses of the ways of sickness; then prepare the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
of fire The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external causes.
and when you have treated this erosion with medicine, but it does not help, then you should cover the affected limb up to the site of the erosion, so that the patient escapes through death, or through the greater evil, from the defect in the limb;
so that the patient escapes through death, or through the greater evil, from the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, appearing as if it were burned by fire, and then comes darkness, after which the corrosion of limbs spreads from limb to limb, and throughout the body; so hasten to cover it,
and if it is caused by the sting of venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions, vipers, and the like,
if the corrosion is on the head or neck, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come just up to the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, then grip at the joint, so that the burn does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, then grasp at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death. and there are no remedies against this, other than the amount of its virtue.
And so it is with burns: if it comes to the first joint, then grasp at the next joint;
and if it comes on the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a lash;
and the way of lashing the limb, whether above or below, is to tie it above and below, and one minister stretches one of the lines downward, and another minister stretches the other line upward, and you unscrew the joint which is between the two lines to a width of one and a half fingers, so that the bone is exposed;
then the cup or socket, and place on each side a linen bandage, so that the socket does not touch the healthy area, and comes to the patient another injury and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the site aggressively. or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
then tie the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
there happened to him a darkness which seemed like a burn from fire,
and this corrosion started at the bottom of his big toe, so that it affected all of the foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and was healed;
a long time after that, the corrosion returned on the toe of the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed impactions after purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
he requested that I cup his hand, and I did not want to, as I had no hope of drawing out the matter; and I doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, because the man's strength was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and he healed his hand;
I do not know what else to say except that one should make more of these things if there is a need for them.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then they rupture and discharge, and the place remains hollow, just like vessels; and the skin on top is as delicate as a loosened napkin, and it does not grow to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "healthy",
but if it extends to the bone, then it is called "fistula".
and cook it so that you cover the whole skin, and especially when it is thin, just like a cloth; and do not harm it in any way.
And if you are concerned that the skin will burn, and there is no complete destruction, and the skin is thick with fat, then treat it thusly:
look to see if the breasts are large, and the navel which is in it has a foul-smelling odor. then cleanse with an Egyptian medication enema made thus: take honey, and oil, and quicklime, in equal amounts, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
And then take some of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey. And use it as an enema on the breast, and constrict the orifice; Then let the medicine remain in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
Do this as many times as necessary until the breast is deflated and the pain is relieved;
and sometimes they are cauterized with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you must grind vine wood ashes, and pour water over them,
then let it run off, and use it to cleanse the wound as much as you know how;
and if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, if he is enema with water and honey or a little powdered quicklime. or you can enema him with honey and milk, as the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the gut move.
And when you have done this and you are sure that the intestines are clean, if one enemas with what makes them defecate.
and it is necessary that you apply an ointment made with rose oil and wine; or enema with other medications and ointments, of which I have spoken about in the section on ointments;
and if the opening of the anus is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter, if you enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and put in some Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough space for the syringe to enter,
and if the anus is above, then the gut or below where it is. For when the bowel is blocked, do not allow flatulence to pass. and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest position it can reach,
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowels move slightly downward and leave nothing of the bowels. and take consolidating medicines to put over the breast,
and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press with force against the opening of the breast. Make the hole larger than the first one. then spread an ointment on a piece of cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the breast opening to ease the bowels. Do not remove the large bandage for several days;
and the one who is on the breast opening, remove often to ease the bowels, and know what flows from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestive or undigested;
take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a way, and you see the nature that leaps above the opening of the breast, if you know that the breasts are hard, and approach holiness;
and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast milk flows for many days, know that the breast will not dry up. And if subtle poisons last a long time, do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are people whose wounds late wound healing, and those who do the opposite;
and if swollen digested milk from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not hurt;
And if the breasts are slow to drain, and are distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as with an ointment that is diaphanous, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
Take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and dilute old wine to equal its consistency.
Then confit and use it; and with the same make cooked honey thickened, when definite ointments are not available,
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire; and then they wrap a cloth around it, and press it against the chest, and sometimes they administer a long bandage, and roots of the celestial lily, which is like flour and centaury;
and roots of the celestial lily, which is like flour and centaury; and uses simple or composite remedies: grind them into powder and place them on the honey I mentioned earlier. And if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is complete, and makes an impression on bone, or on hard members, or on soft tissue. if it is a wound from a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand, or through a stone, or perhaps they grow in other places;
and when it is infected and one takes no care, then a large abscess develops, and they run and ooze pus until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they even cut off the entire nail;
and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder becomes swollen and the colour is purple.
When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that has gathered under the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and starts to poke through, and bleeds, then you should put the thread under the nail that is poking the flesh, and pull it upward gently and subtly, and put burning and corrosive medicine on the remainder of the flesh to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth infected, pull it out in one go as previously described, then treat with poultices until healed;
and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first. then cut across the nail of the thumb,
and be careful that the knife does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
You must adjust what is born in some men's hands by chance is all fleshy, and sometimes it has bones and sometimes not, and sometimes it has nails,
and some are born at the base of the joint, where the knuckle is in some fingers. He who is born with a hernia in his navel should not move, and he who is born at the junction of the intestines, by chance moves;
the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatulum.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore, keep him covered.
For one who is born in the anus, you must first cover the flesh around it, all the way to the bone: then cut the bone with a suitable incision, and then cure him until he is healed.
The joint dislocations that come together come from birth, or from the dislocation of a wound, or from burns, or similar things.
Then you must treat this fracture so that its parts are repaired according to their natural shape. then place between two tents or pieces of cloth soaked in rosemary oil, so that they do not stick together; or you can place it between two pieces of fine linen until the wound is closed, as it should be.
If this occurs in one of his hands with the palm, then treat that fracture as it should be treated.
Of the wicked
Veins are large, wrapped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities, which come into many parts of the body.
And it happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him a purgative drink made from woad, and then give him the basil-based remedy.
The treatment with fire is according to two methods: one is to cut with a knife, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
The incision is done in this way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large vessels are made slender, then stretch the leg from the sick person's thigh down to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision,
then squeeze and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat meat that causes black bile;
and restart the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which helps the patient.
The treatment of this illness is as follows: shave the leg of the patient if there is much hair, then put him in a bath and raise his leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then cover the vein from the top of the knee to the bottom of the ankle, or in the area below the ankle;
then open the skin at the shin, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems as a white cord;
then pull it down underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be easily removed at the edge;
then scrape the skin above the vein until it bleeds, and then let it bleed for two hours; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then raise it with your hand, as you did before, and let it bleed at another edge, as you did before;
then cut another branch, or several if you need them, then grab it and cut it at the bottom of the foot.
then pull it and grab it until you reach the second cut; then pull it out from cut to cut, until it comes out completely, then cut it.
And if you cannot pull it and grab it, then thread an needle with a strong double thread, and tie it and pull it, and put it under a stick, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and make sure it does not pop, because if it pops, then one cannot milk or raise it, and this brings harm to the patient;
and when you have milked it completely, then place wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
And if the bone is bent and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said.
then you must split it crookedly, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have previously said. The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not slice, but punctures the vein.
and it is very curved, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
of the civil vein
This vein is winding in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens due to the warts that develop under the skin,
like snakes and worms that crawl between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a great inflammation in the leg, then the colour changes, and the vein starts to come out, just like a plant's root.
When the head is dislocated, you should wrap it with a piece of linen three and a half yards long, and tie it tightly.
and let the cloth hang loose to the leg, and whenever it slips off, wrap it around the head again, and tie it. and if it is too long, cut off a piece, and wrap the remaining part around it, but do not cover the root at all until it has fully dislocated. for if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess or swelling in that place, and great illness.
because of which it must be treated a little at a time until the end, and nothing remains in the body.
sometimes this vein is treated with five or ten fingers length, and once a man came to me from whom it had exited ten fingers length; and when you grasp it, it pushes out one rod or peg, and it pierces all the way through,
so that everything comes out; and it is emptied of the matter inside, and medicine is applied to the area for several days, then it is cured as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is moist, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and it bleeds profusely, and from which it rains; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
This disease is called "cow disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen:
and there is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body, going up and down. and it travels from one member to another, until it reaches the skin where it goes, then it jumps out.
It is caused by the putrefaction of some humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms in the belly;
And it is feared for its wickedness, because when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see him being treated and milked, he cannot hold back until he farts.
So you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly.
Then cut on top and milk it hard, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you do not bring it out, if you cauterize it with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it makes the eyes run, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, then squeeze under it firmly, and then pull it out;
and one must use a purifying remedy for the body from dissolving medicines for the corrupt humours,
and if the flesh of the wound becomes putrid.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that affects some members, and can move from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise up as a worm at her shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain left that spot and settled in her shoulder,
and then a little later it ran throughout the body until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that she was turning around the body, as I saw her.
I wondered a lot how she moved from limb to limb like this, because I had never seen this disease in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain moving from one place to another, but I do not want to, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought it was because a woman's body is dry and their veins are exposed, and due to this, the wind is forced out.
and it does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with veiled veins.
And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels the pain, if it seems to you as we have said, examine above and below carefully, and then press gently until the flatulence forced out of its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it yourself,
let the patient take flatulence-inducing pills, such as foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and depending on where in the body they land.
The diversity of their tips is that there are those which are large, small, barbed, and smooth. and those which have .ij. angles, and those with tongues, and those with parts; and that which affects a limb, it affects according to two ways; or it affects a principal limb,
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it therefore affects one of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: you must be wary of extracting this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the spinal fluid leaks out from above the brain, is when there is scotomata and redness and blanching of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of consciousness, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes there is discharge from the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and there is moisture emerging from the wound, white like pus, and also flowing out like blood from a vein.
And if this sign appears, stop the treatment and remove the arrow if it is still there.
The signs of a wound when it is on the heart are that it is near the left breast and feels as though it were pierced into something hard, not soft. And sometimes a wound becomes quiet like the pulse, and there is black blood coming out of it, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: know then without a doubt that death will follow.
And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the lung are: spitting up foam without pain, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes hard and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the skin of the foot, it is among the small bones; and it causes great pain and great swelling and breathlessness; and all the limbs from the shoulders are affected.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something indigestible will come out of the wound.
And if an arrow pierces the gut and feces escape through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to several dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you to do, so that you can do the same.
It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him on the forehead, near the eye: I treated it by pulling it from the opposite side under the ear, and he was healed without pain.
And I extracted an arrow that had struck him in the fatty tissue of the eye below the eyelid: The arrow was lodged there, and he could only touch the tip with his finger, and had been shot through with an arrow from a Turkish bow, right through the ear; the jugular vein was cut, and no ill accident befell him.
And he received an arrow in the throat from a Christian, and the arrowhead came out of his ear;
I removed the arrowheads, and extracted it so gently that the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrow from a man's throat, which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then if he had not improved after .xxx days, I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no ill effects.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow wound in his back, and the wound is closed upon it;
and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural dispositions do not change, it does no harm to any of his natural works.
And I saw another man who had an arrow hit him in the face and the wound was sewed up;
and he stayed like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
And I treated an arrow wound in the eye of a prince of royal blood, and was somewhat bent to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out
I was called to tend to the wound after it had been sewn up for four days. When I arrived, I found the wound very tight.
I wanted to test it thoroughly, and I didn't feel anything; and he felt numbness and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I applied a digestive and soothing poultice to the area because the wound was swollen; and I saw the arrow's path.
and I saw the arrow's path. I applied the poultice more often, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time,
as long as he felt the arrow for one day within his body; and he told me so. I applied medicine to the wound with a corrosive agent for several days until it was opened up
and I probed it and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was lodged in the wound; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me;
and transgress the terms for four months,
then open the wound that I stabbed with tweezers, and pluck it from one side and the other, but it cannot come out;
therefore I did not cease to use subtle methods and tools, until one day I took it with well-made tweezers, according to how its shape came to an end in this chapter, so that I treated and restored the wound.
And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I therefore restored it, and the wound was sewn up and healed entirely.
Now I will tell you about the extraction of some arrows: so that you may apply your remedy to what I do not describe, for books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters consider well very little, and what is present and lacking, the new work, and the nine instruments, and the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows grow in the limbs where they are lodged according to two methods: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumped out there where it entered is an arrow penetrating their flesh, and it jumped out some time ago.
And if it does not jump out now, then leave it until the flesh around it is rotted away, and let the opening heal.
And if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day;
and then it will jump out; and if it does not, then pierce around it with a very fine awl, until the flesh around is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body and cannot be seen, then feel around for it with your fingers; and if you feel it, pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then the wound is great; pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs holding it in place,
pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs holding it in place, then cut away the flesh that is pierced in up to two parts that you can reach, and then break or fold the ears of the arrow, so that you can milk it;
and then break or fold the ears of the arrow, so that you can milk it; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but milk it more fiercely.
And if you cannot at once, then leave it until around the area it entered is swollen, then milk it, for extraction is easier then. And if the flow of blood makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and opening the vein, and use whatever means you can to pull out the arrow without danger,
quickly or slowly, with force or gently; and treat the patient according to how they were when the arrow pierced them, for that is the best help you can give them; and if you cannot, then treat them according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where some substance leaks from them, or the skin is swollen in an obvious way that one can see or feel:
Cut then on top, as far as the tongs can reach, and then pull it out; if not, jump now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly so that it goes into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try pulling again until it comes out.
and if there is a splinter in the wound, remove it completely.
and if it is cut, and you see to administer a bandage, then administer .I instrument with a thread, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then tie tightly,
and if the arrow is stuck, to tie an instrument with a pointed end going in, to aid extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then you should cut all around the flesh where the poison is, if you can, then heal the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow pierces the shoulder or the foot or the abdomen or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can reach it;
and be careful not to cut the vein and nerve, and then extract the arrow, and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and heal it until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of common veins in the body There are 31 common veins from which one can bleed, from which there are 16 in the head,
that is to say, 2 veins that are behind the ears, called the two "ear-veins"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples, apparent; and two veins that are on the inside of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two gullets which are in the neck; and the .ii. veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and .ii. veins that are underneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are .v. in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it the "vein of the head"; and the method is called "fasting", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins. and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and the common people call it  "vein of the belly", and it is above the stomach, and it is the one used for bleeding, which clearly opens above the pouch.
The pulse is located between the little finger and ring finger, and it beats twice.
There are three pulses in the leg: one is located below the bend of the left elbow, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the pulse called "nesse", which is located at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg, there are three pulses below them.
The healing of veins that are after the ears is helped by old cataracts and emigration. and the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the patient's neck with your fist, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places down from the head: take hold of your finger, and where you feel the pulse underneath your finger, press in there.
then take a lancelet and pierce it underneath the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upstream. and grip the skin and the vein well, twice through the same spot, and let the blood flow until you see it;
then press and release it, until it is healed;
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding from the two arteries located in the temples is treated with leeches, as previously mentioned. and also for sore eyes and excessive tearing;
and the qualities of bleeding are as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel around under your jaw, and then cut in;
then gently press on the vein above your thumb, and push the lance underneath, and open the vein at the top, and pinch it, just as you did in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then loosen the bandage, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;
then ligature it tightly, and leave it until it heals; we have already spoken of their cauterization and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as good for old diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness.
and its quality is such that the patient should twist his neck until the vein appears. then take the instrument called a "spoon", which has this shape:
and place the tip over the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then tie off the vein so that it is healthy and sometimes work with a large flame.
Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and the wound is oblique, for the bone is close by, and perhaps the flame will break when it is very thin.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids, which help each other, and with regard to tinea, and redness, and orifice in the eye, and facial diseases;
and the nature of their healing is that the patient should twist his neck in a certain direction, as mentioned above;
then heal it, and let the healing be through the transverse vein, slightly from the long flame, because there is no flesh there.
And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they will break; then draw blood, as much as you need, and then ligature it with a thread, and tie it well.
The bleeding of the vein of the nose is useful for headache, and for vertigo, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts their neck, then squeezes their nose with their left hand, and takes a long, thin flame and places it in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well, and now the blood will begin to flow.
and do not let it go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off for a night, as it will heal quickly.
The juice of the stinging nettle helps with the tightening of the anus, and with hemorrhoids, and with varicose veins, and with many illnesses, and with skin conditions, and with ulcers, and with eye diseases;
and the quality of healing is such that the patient stretches his neck downward on both sides, as we have said; and the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool,
then heal the vein of the long one quite widely, then draw blood tempered, or as much as is necessary;
then do the same on the other side, then loosen the ligature, and squeeze the veins gently, that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning so that the wound heals.
Of the bleeding of the lips: The bleeding of veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and腐敗of gums, and splitting of lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
And the quality of this bleeding is to have the patient sit before you, and press his neck as I have said: then turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you can identify them because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: so cut both, and if you do not know them and are in doubt,
so cut both, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the thickest one on each side, and do the same to the .ij. veins above and below, for it is the same procedure.
Of bleeding underneath the tongue Bleeding the veins underneath the tongue helps after bleeding the head, and it aids in tightening the throat, and in diseases of the uvula, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bleeder are that the patient holds his hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on both sides for a black vein;
then bleed both, but do not go too deep, for there are arteries underneath.
Veins of the neck, which are usually healed, are healed according to two methods:
either by pricking with a very fine needle, or with a sharp olive-wood point, as thin as the eye of a needle, called "anasyl." and are large and fine according to the size and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the olive wood point is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the veins of the head, which are smooth and contain thick blood and turbulence; and that is the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
The sainier of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, aids maladies that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and the surgeon must cauterize bleeding profusely and cauterize the artery underneath. And if it pierces the artery, and blood flows, then it must be stopped as I have said. and the flame should not be squeezed, but trimmed like a horse's tail.
And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you want to cut a vein from it, or you heal the vein within the arm: it is made clear; and the cautery with flame, as we have said.
And if you want to find the place for bleeding, you should also stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot on the inside, and then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame;
and make sure you do not pierce the artery when you see the spot sunken in, for that is the artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see it bulge out like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood; hurry, therefore, and place your finger over it firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, for this often happens.
Let him lie with his arm extended, and leave it thus, and do not move it until he is healed. And let him be in fear, and not move it until he is healed.
And if the bleeding is not staunched and it flows, and medicine is not present, then seize the artery and open it, for that is where the blood retreats; and staunch the flow.
And take a piece of bark from a beech tree, and split it, and take one half and bind it well in place until the next day.
If the bleeding is staunched, that is good; if not, then treat it with a poultice, as we have said, of powders which stanch blood;
and the stanching is not effective in many cases due to the small wound and the strength of the arm.
Let the bleeding of a vein continue until it draws blood from the head above and from the body below. because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply and to find the nerve that is underneath, and if it inflames and the patient becomes weak, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument anaesthetic; and shield the nerve to your best ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
Healing of the cephalic nerve helps, drawing blood from the head, and helping the eyes;
and one must heal it with an olive or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest location, and not worry if it is not right the first time, and one can begin again. and by chance, the site may swell in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does no harm. The quality of the bleeding is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done just to maintain health,
and to prevent future illnesses; and the incision should be made in one of the three veins: those are, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should incision at the beginning of the rising of the stars, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
and one should incision on the first or third day, after two or three hours in the day.
The healing that is administered to illnesses has no set time, but whenever the need arises, day or night, at all times and in all seasons.
and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a child beyond the fourth month until the seventh month. Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled in any manner, they should first cleanse the bowels with a mild clyster, if he has much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw off from the intestines the harmful excess fluids damaging the principal limbs;
nor is there any cure for those who are too full of meats and wines, as long as they remain so, nor for the gouty or dropsical;
and if one desires to be bled after colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with women, and exertion, staying up late, and fasting, or due to something in the weapon or from the body;
then subtly draw off the humors if they are thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have that skill;
then enter the bath if nothing can hurt it to draw out the blood,
and heal the vein of the foot around the third, as we have said;
and guard against work, pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the healer be higher than those being healed, and rub the arm two or three times,
then loosen the bandage above, for when it is too tight or too loose, he cannot walk.
and then rub the area by hand, until the veins swell and can be felt;
then wet the flannel with a little old oil, then place his index finger of his left hand on that vein under the armpit where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst when cut. For there are veins which flow like cords into the body, and also such as are filled with blood. so that when one puts them under the flame, they draw back from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with these.
and if he opens the vein, the wound is often too narrow, so that it is necessary for the surgeon to be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, he should try again a little lower on the same spot or above it, if the area is not swollen.
And if the arm is swollen, and the patient fears, let them stop for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance, hot abscesses will come out; then enter into a bath, then resume bleeding if she pleases;
and if the vein is small, cut it across and you doubt that it will not let out as much blood as you want, then pierce that same vein directly with a flame;
and the wound a little widely, so that the arm is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not recommence the bleeding, and put some linseed oil on it, because it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is changed into pus.
and thus administer linseed oil in every bleeding that you open veins to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens with triacle and bowels, when one puts it on the place; so subtly the blood splits and escapes when it is too thick.
And if there are large abscesses, which happen many times, especially when it is not bled before or the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, put a sponge soaked in lukewarm water over the area for an hour.
and you should do this after the blood comes out of the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days with some blackness or greenness, it will not harm him. And if you see any swelling, put onto it some aloe or myrrh ground into rose water, or something similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the site of the basilic vein; put your hand over it, and if you feel the area soft to the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore be sure not to place anything on the wound that we have described, for it might enter an artery; instead, apply a dry ointment to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw blood from each according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that they make a larger wound, and have the flames wide;
and to the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him a little and often, and he must be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking;
and this bleeding method is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from the long or the broad vein.
And to those whose bodies need bleeding, one should give wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot, then draw blood three or four times.
And if they are of a cold complexion, then before bleeding eat moist bread in mazarin syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and aniseed, and fragrant syrup.
And if he faints during bleeding, after losing a lot of blood, he should drink a mixture of broth and subtle aromatic syrup.
and use the other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for opening a vein.
And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, when he is weakened by heavy bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong pulse, they should bleed at .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere, one must bleed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that has been heated and brings on fever; so one must draw out a large quantity and widen the orifice until it drips through a cloth. Then, after you have learned all the conditions for bleeding, and place your hand on his pulse when he is bleeding so that death does not come through the cloth, and this happens many times when the bleeder is negligent;
and when you see the arm being dislocated, and blood emerging for a second time, and the orifice is closed, do not press on it directly; nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm suddenly, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; there you apply the fire directly to the tip of the vein, until the frozen blood within the vein melts and emerges; and place on top of it a little salt mixed with water, and press gently on it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it until the abscess is relieved.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healthy in terms of the vein in the head because it is composed of them.
And the way to heal it is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
then let them be bound gently so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the inside, not from the wide or long side;
and the hole should be large, and it should be healed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, as one puts more in during the winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein, as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The salve for healing the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is made:
Immerse the hand in hot water until the vein is swollen, as one sees it. And if you heal it crookedly, and if you cover it from all sides, it will not hurt anything.
And do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh,and se tu le fames a ta guise, si ne te puet miger ne deler;
and then put your hand in hot water, if there is frozen blood in the wound, and he cannot get it out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each vein.
The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right one.Et s’il aduenist que la main destre ou senestre sainie, et ne voit nule sang ne nule sainie, si met sus li piere et sus li membres oile de fong, si qu’ele se puet mouevra et eslonger; car ele est congelee.
Bleeding from the left little finger is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body.The bleeding of the little finger on the right hand benefits the diseases of the upper part of the body, and the bleeding of the little finger on the left hand benefits the diseases of the lower part of the body.And if the right or left little finger bleeds, and there is no blood or swelling seen, put oil of fennel on the stone and on the affected member so that it can move and lengthen, for it is frozen. as diseases of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of his healing is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and rubs it on the wound until it bleeds. and lies down on the joint of the foot; and if the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many kidneys;
then heal it in the largest vein, or at the ankle, where it is most convenient.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across, as well as by copping; and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if the healing does not work the first time, then try again a second time on top of it, because the spot is salty. Do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot equally.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its treatment extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of its treatment are that the patient should enter the bath, and twist above the ankle four times.
Otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then treat it in every way you know how, by crossing over, and it is worth having the patient lie down, because the site is sensitive and it tires out many people.
and it is worth having the patient lie down, because the site is sensitive and it tires out many people. And if you do not treat it, then cut some skin from the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
and let blood flow until you see it, then loosen the ligature, place cotton on it and hold it tightly; it is now healed.
Bleeding with leeches
Leaches are made from horns, or iron, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this farting which is without pain occurs in two ways: either with fire or without fire;
and two more in two places in the neck; and the windpipe under the chin; and cupping on the two shoulders; and cupping above the hips; and cupping on the two arms; and cupping on the two legs; and cupping at the ankles; And the venesection does not draw blood, unless from small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
and therefore it weakens one in no way, as is done with phlebotomy; and it must not be administered, neither with all fire nor any sense of fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it is needed to bleed, or due to habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle and at all times.
For there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and some who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some spit up a drop of blood in their mouths, have swollen tongues, and bleed; and if they fall into a trance, see visions of blood, and suffer pain and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast for three hours during the day.
The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that comes from the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this farting if it is in the place of the healing of the headache,
and one of a cold temperament or who has catarrh should not use it, as it does them great harm;
and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
And those who are often healed by this, become oblate, and for this reason the leech should place the ventouse a little lower because of the risk of oblateness.Et si est en leu de la sainie del coeur, et que li home soit de chaude complexion, il est bon;
The ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and the basilic vein, and for this reason it is effective in relieving pain in the feet. and in splitting of the channel of the lung, and in belching, and in repletion;
and one should push it gently, for if it is held too tightly, it causes injury to the oesophagus or stomach and heart.
The ventilations at the .ij. ribs in the neck are good for pains in the head, and ophthalmy and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth,
and is in the place of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when inserting it, so that he does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventilation under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth and gums and similar diseases in the mouth; it is in the area of the veins on both lips.
Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Ventilation of the groins is as effective as ventilation of the .3 veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deep, because under the skin there are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the back is good for hemorrhoids and illnesses below, and the cupping glass should be large and made of brass, because it needs to suck well; and sometimes if it breaks, it makes large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the joints, and for pain in the hip, and the bladder, and they relieve swelling; and they are placed at the .ij. sophenes, and at the .ij. ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring fainting in various conditions.
The way to apply the cupping glass is that you put it on first empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the skin reddened and swollen, and the blood appears; then let go, and reapply the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such thick skin and clear pores: you should pierce only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, you should pierce twice: the first time to open up the pathway for the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, you should pierce a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood, we only piercing once.Et se li sans est clers et legiers, si convient soulement ferir une fois, et traire legierement, et ne trop ne trop poc.
And if we want a lot of blood, we should pierce repeatedly; and if the blood is thick, we pierce deeply, and the terms are that the heart be pierced suddenly,Et se li sans est clers et legiers, si fier en parfond, et li termines que li keurs soit perciez lentement.
and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and tough, and who have narrow pores, that you apply the places of the cups with oil which opens and dissolves: if it is in the state [of being dislocated], with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seeds;
and if it is in the liver, with oil of watercress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or similar.
And if the excess is gross and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
And if one is healing from an open wound with tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied.
But one should wash after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from ash, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of alder, or infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not advisable to use a cupping-glass before the bath or emetic, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping,
and it is advisable that he should fast when he must be bled and when he has been bled. And beware of those who are constipated and whose blood is too thick and inflamed; if it is advisable for them to eat cool foods, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
and eat small amounts, and food from a bowl, and moist foods.
And those with a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and warm old wine mixed with new, and eat small amounts, and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men a little treacle or musk before the bleeding, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members; and the blood is drawn off gently, but those who are hot-tempered must not drink it.
The leeches that are placed without bleeding are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the goiter, and on the belly, and the groin, and the thighs, and the hips, because these members do not tolerate being bled on the eyes,
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we put leeches on the breasts when they are healthy; to reduce inflammation in a member, as we put leeches on the belly and groin to shrink a member;
and removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, removing by its attractive power the obstruction or causing the stone to leave its place.
and it does this when placed over the liver and spleen when there is retained flatulence,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to draw only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
such as diseases of the lungs and in such a way one fills the cup with warm water alone, or water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The form of the fire cupping is thus:
And it has two inches wide and a half palm deep, and on the edges all around in the middle is a small hole, as for pushing through an awl,
and should be of copper, smooth in front so that it does not blister the patient when placing it on the limb;
and in the middle is a horizontal rod of iron or steel, to place a candle in,
and they are both great and small, according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
for the leeches on children are different from those on the elderly, and on the thin from the fat.
And one should thus place this leech on the limb:
take a candle of wax or a linen thread, and place it within the leech through the tube that is within the leech, so that the heat is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then places it on the limb, and one's fingers are placed over the hole we described so that when one wishes, they can release the heat, and then remove the cupping glass;
and apply the ointment again as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, for all water, there is neither a reed nor a hole, and it is not applied until when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only.
and this is the form:
Leeches are not used except in parts where cupping glasses cannot be applied due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare flesh, such as the nipples or navel, and other similar places;
and its quality is that when you apply leeches which are in clean, clear water without any scent, they will attach themselves;
and put them in tepid water, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; then bleed from a vein and use cupping, then rub the affected part until it turns red, and apply leeches to it;
and when they are swollen and itching, if there is a place where a cupping glass can be placed, then that should be done, as it is very effective.
If not, then raise the affected area, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
and if the bite is too close to the body of the snake, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the swelling subsides;
and if the bites are multiple, apply powdered vitriol or lye, and similar substances, until the swelling subsides;
or you can place half-peeled beans on the spot and leave them until they turn black, which will also stop the swelling;
and if you need more, capture more snakes.
And if leeches will not attach, rub the area with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the leech attaches. and then place them on top, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach;
and when you see them excrete, sprinkle some powdered aloes, salt, or ash on them, and they will stop right away.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish people are speaking about this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
And for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found anyone good at it;
and I don't know anything about it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, and through my own studies, and through experimentation and the habits of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of speech and the chapters where the wise man directs his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twisting, or displacement occurs in someone, you should quickly treat the patient with medicine from both sides, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or old age.
or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and deer and lamb meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill themselves with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubts about a hot abscess or inflammation of the affected member; then the patient will return to their first treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling or have粘性, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and calf's stomach, and offal, and fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things. For with much swelling the fracture will be reduced and heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the elderly and the frail cannot heal well or unite according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
but do not worry, reset the broken bone.i. large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and do not stop completely, and for this reason, one must eat hearty food, as we have said.
And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, like the point of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, like the point of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a small split.
And each manner has its own technique and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes to mind;
and the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted, and clearly appears when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sensation of pain on touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but there may still be twisting, or splitting, or a minor fracture. If you must not move it with your hand, but put on remedies that come later, and then now constrain it gently.
And you should know that fractures that go into the bone, and are the two parts separated, they must now be set to an equal point, so that hot abscesses may come;
and if hot abscesses come, then let them be for one day, until the abscesses are settled; then set it evenly with ease and bleeding, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then constrain it, as it should be done afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then they should be reduced by two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or by one part to the hand if it is a small limb, or by two cords, or by one cord and the hand.
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are brought together, you should reduce them by all means in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust the two ends of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well-aligned: then dress it nicely, and do not stretch or press too much, as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their actions, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at rest, then treat the patient carefully so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise. and be sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that he feels no pain; and be sure that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.
For there are small members like fingers, toes, and the like; so it is appropriate to wrap them with soft, thin linen.
And for larger ones like arms and legs: wrap with a wide, strong bandage, as wide bandages embrace the entire large member and restrict it evenly all around, so there is no pressure point.
bind it tightly with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and hold your hand over the break for a moment, then go above the break and hold it less tightly, so that the break is drawn out a little.
and soften the bandage gradually, until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around the wounded area again.
then go to the part below the break and hold it gently, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said above in the first bandage;
then place between the bandages of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then bind it all together with a bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot upon it which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for a few days.
then press upon it with a warm cloth, and let it be half the width of a palm, or a piece of wood that is used for cutting, or a palm frond, and let it be shaped thus:
but it is necessary that the cloth that one places on the dislocation be a little larger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it suits the smallness or size of the member;
then hold it against the stars as you did at first, then tie a thread over it, just as you did at first over the fracture.
the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thin or too thick, and made of soft linen.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen foolish people make their knots out of tightly twisted linen, and this is a great mistake, for the knot will not be even if it is too thin, and there should be no more than a finger's width between each star.
And if the patient is sore on the head from the stars after the binding, put beneath them linen or woolen bandages so that it does not hurt.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not advisable to extend all the broken limbs on the first day. Because when a limb is large, it should not be extended until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess;
and here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting: take flour from the mill walls and mix it with egg white to create a plaster, neither too thin nor too thick. This is the common method for restoring fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts each of rosewood, ladanium, myrrh, and asafetida, and 2 parts each of gum arabic and mastic; 5 parts each of myrrh and aloe, 8 parts each of aloes and alechil; and grind them into powder, and mix them with egg white. If the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it heals broken bones quickly, and is useful for many people.
Another method of plaster that is useful for twists: take 10 parts each of mastic and balm of gilead, 8 parts each of myrrh and aloe, 6 parts acacia, and 10 parts Armenian bole; grind well and cook in water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to shrink the wound: take new wool, moisten it in ass's milk and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain.Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure le dislocation de la chié et de tout li corps: pren mugat et asefetide ana  .x. З.; mirre et aloes ana  .viij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З.; et confit en aigue, et applie sus lou leu qu’il demoure; et qu’il soit bien couvert por qu’il ne se mueve mie, et dure 3 iours ou quatré, et il restourera.
Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dead nettle leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. 3; mirre et aloes, ana .v. 3; alechil .viiij. 3; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastement, et vaut à plusieurs homes.
Another method of ointment for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to reduce the swelling of the abscess. Take the root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; and grind, and cook with wine, and if the member is scorched, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of ointment, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take the roots of comfrey, and flax seed, borage, melilot, and stonecrop, and violet and chamomile flowers, of each one part; and grind, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and too hard.Et il dist ou livre que quant aposteme dure vinerent, qu’on doit prendre leveine de vezel, et la broier, et mettre sus l’aposteme, et porroier le membre; et si on le poinget a lor nassance, que li estraint les euelz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naisse.
And it seems that Galen says that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things that are a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe wood and incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et qu’on doit prendre le membra par la nassance et le tirer vers le haut et vers les costes en la circuite de la vaine; car il dit que si on tire le membre par la nassance, que li sang veult aler a sa place, ou il est necessere.
Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and beaver castoreum, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment out of it and apply it.
Then loosen it a little bit after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it again after several days.
And if pain or itching comes to the area, or discomfort or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of seawater, and dip it in water, and wipe the area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry bed, moistened with water or rose oil, and lay upon it a hot stone, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;
and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is relieved, then start again with gentle pressure and a little ointment, but do not pull as hard as before; gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all around, and you need ointment and bandages, then start again as you did first.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, do not loosen it until after 3, 4, 5 or 7 days; and sometimes let it rest for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone approaches the flesh above.
then tighten it more than before, and the flesh swells, as I said before; and if you see the place drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach it. take hot water to heat it, every time you loosen it, and do this three times a day, and ease up a little on the pressure.
through this work then shorten the limb, and gently massage what they call the "fool's muscle," which straightens out the limb: it is harmful, and this work is fearful, and I see nothing else other than to rest it and do it correctly.
of the various ways of breaking There are many types of fractures, with different shapes, and the causes are distinct.
for it has fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone is broken all the way to the socket, just as with an ax or a pole; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "ax fracture."
Or the sword cuts the bone without penetrating, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is a concussion, or a splintering, or from the neck of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if the fracture is piercing, extending to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the slit is small, and for this reason this break is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the piece of bone enters below, and the site is shaved as the blacksmiths do when they work on the anvils; then the bone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as children's heads;
and it happens with all these types of breaks that small pieces are displaced, just like tiles; and I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by their appearance, and by examination with the fingers, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above.
The hair-like appearance is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it with a finger, then the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, take care with the symptoms of the disease; and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a surprising accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the child comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must cut the umbilical cord before the fourteenth day when you can.
And if it is in the summer, you must cut the cord before the seventh day, so that the thread under the cord does not rot and cause the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the fracture comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and it is that you grip the head of the wounded person, and expose above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the wound more gently than you can,
and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, then aid it with what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the place with wet cloths in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed and you are certain of no bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways. The first way is to cut closely in front, and this is the shape:
Then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is to have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron; work gently so you do not cut the head.
And if the bone is hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer cuts with chisels, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the bone; and you should have a margin or circle on top, preventing the point from going beyond the bone; you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, and you should have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of chisels:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place .i. probe on the bone and move your hand back and forth until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut into the space between the holes with an incision, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is fitting that you cut away the membrane that is left on the bone with any other suitable tool resembling an incision tool, but it should be more flexible and thinner than the other incision tools.
And if anything remains of the small bones or any chips, remove them gently with one of the tools; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is much safer, and he highly recommends it, and his word is final. It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the broken parts appear to be moving, and then, when you have uncovered this part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, for that is its shape:
And do not cut from one side, but the part is curved on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone. Then strike gently with a small mallet on top, so that you slightly cup the bone all around and be very careful of the membrane underneath.
If it is adherent to the bone, loosen it gently, for the bone can be loosened without harm or fear.
And if the bone is not split all the way to the membrane and only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to return to that roughness, removing the scales with a very fine rasp so as to have various quantities to apply in each place according to what is most suitable, depending on the work and the shape of the break.
If you walk before great razors, and after smaller ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must administer treatment according to their nature; and this is something that is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the sinus is exposed, you should spread a linen bandage, according to the amount of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another bandage doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put too much pressure on the sinus, then administer another ligature above, and do not tighten it more than just enough to hold the wound;
and let it stay like that for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it, and apply remedies such as lilium, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; turn these into powder and place on the wound, then administer more remedies without biting;
and ensure the wound is clean before you apply the ointment and that no pus gathers beneath the skin, for when pus gathers under the brain's membrane, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient; indeed, when one applies a biting substance to the wound, it hardens on top.
Take care then, if no harmful accident occurs to the patient as we have said, for there is no doubt about it.
And if blackness does not appear but rather healing because of the medicine one has applied, such is its power, then you must mix a portion of honey with three parts of rose oil and apply it to the wound; then treat him with appropriate remedies until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or just one part, for there are two bones there; and below is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should press your little finger or finger against the nose, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it there with pressure, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the bones cannot come together, then you should put it equal to the head of a rod that is somewhat thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscesses are healed, then put on a tent made of linen cloth over the head of the nose, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put on another one from the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some restoratives say that one should moisten the bandages in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they must be moistened in preparation of egg white, and of mill powder; then leave the bandage, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of bandages, and then a soft cloth around, and holds the fracture, and blows the patient among; now do as you see fit.
And if hot abscesses come in the face while you are working on it, put ointment or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a poultice of daisy leaves.
And if hot abscesses do not come, put a hot poultice made of wheat flour, and incense powder, cooked in egg white. Then put it on top of light wool pads, and do not bind the face.
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then close the split, and treat it with healing poultices and plasters, as well as appropriate ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents and insert cane splints until it heals.
from the dislocation of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no open wound, and the dislocation is only slight, and it is not broken in two, but rather displaced, one can tell easily.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jaw, then place your index finger of the right hand, and lightly plug the break inside, and release it with the other hand, and apply pressure evenly.
And if the break of the jaw is displaced on one side, then you must extend it one part, so that it is even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or cracking, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerotum to the broken jaw, and place over it a double drape; and place over the drape a large, well-shaped splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset it to how it was changed; and apply plaster over it, made from mill powder with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerotum; and place over the plaster a light linen, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many times it heals within three weeks.
And if a hot abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it carefully with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is nothing left in it, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and put over it some suitable poultices to promote healing.
of the fire The collarbone breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in three different ways: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there can be a break with a wound.
And the treatment is when there is no wound with the break, you must have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side; then use your fingers to align the broken bone so that it is set correctly, with no visible displacement or misalignment.
If you need more leverage, place a round piece of cloth or linen under the shoulder, as thick as necessary; then lift and gently pull on the collarbone, holding the patient's shoulder steady with your hand, and align the broken bone as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of its socket because it comes up easily, then the patient should lie on his back, and place one ear down under the shoulder, and the assistant pulls the shoulder downward, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Then press the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you must cut over it; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then apply the cautery to one of the cuts that you have made in order to draw out the pus.
It should be shaped like a spoon, and not pointed, and as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; it should have two prongs, one wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bone.
And when you are sure that there is hot pus in the wound, then dress it with ointment, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt there is hot pus, then dress it with ointment and bandages according to its amount.
And if a deep abscess comes, moisten a cloth in rose oil and ass's milk and wine, and apply it.
The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to put on the bone the plaster of mill dust and egg white, and apply light bandages above, and put a pillow under the shoulder, if necessary. Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then put a double cloth on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a thin board three inches wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and put the board over the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit and under the injured armpit; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the limb holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the board does not move over the broken bone, then release it little by little every day, and when the ligature loosens, restrain it.
let the patient lie on his back, and while he sleeps place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the shoulder; thus the dislocation of the shoulder will be alleviated by the raising of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it if an accident does not occur, until twenty days have passed.
then restart the poultice if you see that it is needed, and keep it on until he is healed; she is usually healed in twenty-eight days, or less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder is dislocated or separated from its socket, and it is not felt by the touch; then adjust it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then apply powdered flour with eggs, and light bandages, and place it on a double cloth; then put it on a large and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder; and if there are bumps under the board, then use a piece of linen, so that the board is even; then tie it firmly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move from its position, and check the bandage every day; and each time it becomes loose, tie it again, and adjust the board if it has moved from its position, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is usually healed in twenty or twenty-fifth days.  And when these numbers are completed, then untie it, and you will be sure, for it is not an easy bone to reset.
And if a piece of the bone pokes out in front, and not underneath the heart, they cut above it, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that happens rarely; it often breaks at the top. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, and they feel pain everywhere.
And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the two ribs with his hands, and skillfully adjusts the positioning so that the bone is set correctly; then he applies plasters and bandages over the fracture site with a thin layer of salt, or other lightweight material, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it to the broken bone, ensuring it doesn't move; and he winds the bandage around the body, and tightens it comfortably, and checks every hour, and if it softens, he tightens it; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, he should hurry and loosen it, and clean away any discharge that has accumulated, and reapply the treatment; then he reapplies the plaster, and tightens it until it is healed.
of the fracture of ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the thick ones near the back, and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels it well upon examination with both hands.
And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be. And then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if you need to.
And if the fracture of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain, and stabbing, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has pains in his sides, and is short of breath and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients held it in high regard.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push out the fracture.
We do not make an incision for a hot abscess unless one has already formed. And if there is one, then drain it.
And some say that one should place cups on the site to draw out the inflammation, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping will draw out the vital spirits due to weakness.
And some say that one should cover the place with soft woolen cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the space around it even, then it is cured with a poultice of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which pokes out the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then one should split above the broken rib, and place a instrument underneath to ward off the gangrene; and then one must cut into the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure it with poultices until it heals. And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten a cloth in rose oil, and place it on the wound; and cure the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie quietly on his side where he should be, until it heals.
of the fracture in his neck
Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if you see their hands soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or straighten them, and when you pierce them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are in a deadly state in many dispositions, and if they are mute and feel well when one presses and pierces them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness will be cured if treatment is applied.
And if a similar condition comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if their feet are soft, and if the symptoms are also in their hands, and they experience wind and urination without control; and when they are pressed on their belly, they urinate without control. And when they are pressed on their back and they want to sit up, they cannot. Know that they are in a deadly state: do not labor in their cure.
And if these symptoms do not occur, then the condition is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply an ointment to the spine if there is a hot abscess, using rose oil or the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and they must not sleep on the side where they feel pain, until they are healed. And if any bone is dislocated, one must cover the wound over the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", place your thumb of your left hand into your pouch, and hold it equal to the other hand in your power, then apply the plaster and the bandage on top, if you need to; then tighten it, and if there is a dislocated bone, do the same, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
from the fracture of the hip bone
It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there will be a slight diminution in size at the head; and they become long and decline towards the buttocks, and cause pain in the affected area, as well as swelling and bruising.
And the restoration is to extend your hand over the fracture; and know which is the broken part and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then put the broken part in its natural position.
And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inwards, then let the patient lie on his belly so that the restoration of that fracture may be prepared for. And when you have made it even, then put on the plaster, then put on a board of wood or horn, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs until the fracture is healed.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
And if painful abscesses come, do not touch them until the painful abscesses are soothed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, unless there is some bad incident; and that is the way.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one is that you take a rod of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with a cord, and hold them upright, and put the patient on a seat; then let him lay his broken arm on the rod, so that it comes to rest, and have a curve of the rod, then lean over something heavy or let the minister stretch it downward; then have the patient apply pressure on the break with both hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that one holds the patient upright, and ties his hand to his neck, then command two ministers, so that one pulls what is above the break with their hands, and the other pulls beneath by one of the cords, and each stretches his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then press .I. band below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the ministers to his part. And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put .I. middle band under the shoulder pad, and .I. other towards the neck, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the neck, then .I. light band must be placed lightly, without labor, so that the fracture is equal above the location, and above the neck; then put the fracture equal as it should be, and press it, if no warm abscesses come to it.
And if hot abscesses come to it, then do not press until 7 days, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the hot abscesses until they are soothed; then press it, and the way to press is that you put the ointment on the fracture, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and press above the shoulder, and above the arm, so that the arm is in place of stars, if no thing moves it, or the bone is moved.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use stars, and put a larger and stronger star on the fracture than the others, and let there be between each star 2 inches of space, and let each star be as large that it passes the fracture by 3 inches on each side; then press upon the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter, above the fracture, more forcefully and less in moving away.
And if you see the seat of the stars, and the straitness, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs at the site, nor any pus can reach the member because it is too tight. Then release it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then loosen the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a flat cushion of wool, and examine every hour by day or by night that the figure of the broken member does not move, nor is the bandage softened; then release it through the power of medicine, and give him meat as we have previously stated, so that the meat is in its most subtle form; and when he begins to recover, let the food be solid. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to take forty days to heal; then one should loosen the bandage and administer baths and ointments to promote healing. And if the dislocation is severe and swollen, one should wait a month before releasing it.
of the broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'bony', of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the armpit; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large bony bone may break, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small bony bone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy; and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If it is only the small bony bone that is broken, then it should be gently extended and set even.
And if it is the large bony bone that is broken, then it should be stretched more strongly; and he should extend his arm on .i. cushion, and hold his armpit higher than the other hand, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross his legs over himself, and .i. cushion in front of him, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then the minister extends his arm to the part under his hand, or to .i. ligature, and another minister to .i. above. And then he should set the bone even, according to its best form.
And if in the break there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any dislocation that grabs the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on the bone and the artery.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it singularly in this chapter; take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then glue .i. bandage of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay .i. bandage gently on top, until the abscesses are soothed. Then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster made from flour with an egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be slightly larger and stronger than the others; and know that it must have six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or both; and tighten more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes by, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the bandages on top of the fracture be soft and moist, neither hard nor rough; and let the thread used to tighten it be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. Then inspect the member and the ligature after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must wet the member with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the member not be bound and at rest. Then restart the tightening, and if the ligature becomes loose and the bone out of alignment, address it.
And if one is wary that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nourishment flows, and then tighten it again.Et se li os se desevrent, si covient qu’il soit estrais adés fors; et li norrissemens ne peut venir au membre por ceu qu’il est trop estrois.
And if none of the things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days have passed or until the bones around [the fracture] have healed; then he can move his hands and neck freely, keep his neck still and avoid movement and exertion, and sleep on his back. Know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, depending on the composition and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and only swelling comes from it many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or swollen, the patient should sit upright, and extend his arm in front of him, keeping his elbow bent at a right angle; then he should place his hand on a flat surface, and the practitioner should straighten the broken bones and bring them into alignment; then they should apply the poultice and bandages if there are no abscesses, and then put on a splint according to the size of the injury; finally, they should wrap it in a single linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the navel, make a sponge out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it to his broken navel; then hold it with a long piece of cloth, and the stamp should be as large as the palm of your hand, and you must hold it firm, as it should be.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must place a stamp on top and another one underneath the wrist so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the arm and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as it should be, and hold it with the palm; and if you see fit, place a small straight stamp to raise the fracture, and don't move it; and if the fracture is in any other finger like the index or others, set it straight and tie it with the adjacent healthy finger; either tie them all together while holding them steady, or place a stamp on top as you would on the thumb; take care in the healing process and in the application of a hot abscess, and treat any wound that arises, as I have said.
of a broken thigh
The thigh bone is often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; its restoration is to bind one ligature above the break and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each bandage to its part equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the hip and the other below the break. And if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be below the knee, and the extension should be downward; then the physician should put the bone back in its natural position with his two hands, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless an abscess forms there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in this way.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. It is necessary to wrap a bandage around the fracture: take a long, thick strip of fabric folded in half or doubled over itself two or three times, and use it to bind the leg tightly from the ankle up to the root of the shin; then tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, passing below the knee, so that the ends of the thread reach above the knee. Then wrap the bandage around the leg and the thigh, and place small splints over the fracture site and on top of the bone in the leg. Fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to ensure the binding is even, then begin to tie the bandage firmly with three or four knots over the fracture. The more you tie above the fracture, the looser the bandage should be; then test the two ends of the thread that you tied between the leg and the thigh, and tighten the three splints on top until there is no movement in the leg, then leave it as it is so that no abscess or swelling or anything similar develops.
If an abscess develops, untie the bandage and address what has formed, as we have said many times before. If there are pieces of bone protruding, they should be removed if possible; if not, then the area should be slit open and drained, then treated as described until the wound is healed.
Sometimes the thigh or arm may be broken in this way when splints are used, as in the case of a dislocation; nonetheless, the treatment described will not harm the patient.
And you shall know that the thigh is restored in one day or a little less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the back of the knee
You shall know that in the back of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a split, or one hole, and it happens to all wounds, and without a wound, and this feels good.
And the restoration is to put equal pressure on what is torn at his fingers, as long as it can be; then put the ointment, and if necessary put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then observe all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar; then put to each accident what it needs, as long as it is healed.
of the break in the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, one of which is properly called the 'mustelz', and the other is called the 'foscile'. All kinds of breaks occur in the leg as they do in the arm, so its restoration is the same as for the arm, and the procedures are the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg will be deformed from all sides.
And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
If the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns black underneath. Then apply extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the break is bad and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, then take two strips of wood that span the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and so is well; and some administer a splint as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg into it to prevent movement, and properly apply it to the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
from the break of the bones in the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but at times a break occurs in the bones of the foot and also in the two small bones, and there is only bruising with various dispositions.
If it happens to the leg bones that they are broken and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their place; then apply the ointment and poultice on top, and under the leg in the abdomen, a small piece of wood with two smooth sides, then bind it to the leg, then wrap bandages around, and other things you need.
And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones even if they are broken or displaced.
And if one or more of the fingers are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put under the foot that small piece of wood I mentioned before, and bind it tightly; and if there are one or two or more broken, put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the wood tightly under the foot; and let the top of the wood press firmly against the abdomen of the foot.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, from what we have already said; and treat each case as it should be treated.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's finger is fractured, have her sit with her back bent forward and held from behind; then fill the fracture with cotton, and place in it a pebble as big as a bean; then make the woman stand up little by little, and at the same time remove the cotton until it reaches the opening of the fracture, and the bone will return with the pebble. If she needs to urinate, take out the cotton, and once she has finished, put it back in. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. Then take a lamb's bladder, attach a straw to its opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing through the straw until the bladder is inflated inside; this will bring the fracture back together. Then fill the fracture with cotton and leave it there for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or a woman is fractured, it is restored in the same way as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply themselves to studying and understanding my book with effort. For the fractures show, through their many dispositions, the right path to restoration: understand this therefore.
For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap it tightly with cloth and leave it for three days, checking on it every day, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be bled immediately, so that the bleeding we have described can attest to this.
And if the wound bleeds, then apply Vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then restart the healing of the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses come from it.
And if abscesses come from it, then leave off the healing until the next day, until the abscesses are settled, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident by doing so.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extension is not apparent to you so that you can put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the surgeon to press down on it three or four times, depending on each case of a broken bone; and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend during compression on the affected limb, and let it be sharp in front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called a "palanche," so that the bent shoulder should be placed on the visible end of the bone; and you take hold of it once, as far as it will go, and make it even with the other. And if the fracture is delicate and the instrument cannot well grip the bone, then you should cut the end of the bone, so that the instrument can get a good grip on it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut into it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a knife, to your ability; and then pull out what remains in the bone of splinters and tiny shards.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its place, then wet a cloth with black, acidic wine, and apply it neatly if it is on a joint; and do not put any ceruleum or other ointment on the wound that would cause pus and corruption to form; then administer the poultice when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the bandage all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the bandage; and many times fools have done this and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient; and let the constriction be softer and gentler than other bandages.
And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that evil accidents may come from it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap around the wound, instead of poultices, hard bandages, and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you have put on it completely, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ointments.
And you should loosen the bandage on the limb twice a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and closed.
And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly.
And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a hook and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula or any other form of corruption appears, you must treat it according to what he says in the chapter before. And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not touch it, because many die from it; but let it be until it scabs over, perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
And when a bone is broken on the limb, and the limbs are dislocated, you must reset it to its place and hold it as long as you can; and if it will not stay in place, then you must reset it, but it is not good for it to be too long dislocated.
Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, an unsightly appearance results in the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take heed therefore if the patient becomes constipated: use astringent medicines like aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, mixed with wine, egg white, or garlic; place them on the wound as poultices and bind them tightly, leaving them in place for several days; then remove the bandage and repeat this treatment until the swelling is reduced. You may also apply a plaster made from finely ground stone to draw out the inflammation. If the injury has turned into a hard lump like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the superficial tissue and excise the excess growth. Alternatively, you may refer the patient to a surgeon who can remove it, healing the wound afterward.
When the bone fracture is healed, but the limb remains weak and delicate, this can occur due to several reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly and not properly; another is that there were too many ligatures, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, especially before its time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, resulting in weakness.
And the cure is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer to him baths, and give him joy and leisure; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and frequently moisten it with warm water, until the swelling goes down into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
then the limb will become straight again after recovery
When the limb is twisted after recovery and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again completely, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm may come from them, and even death; all the same, if the dislocations and wounds are fresh, then one should apply warm water or herbs which soften, such as leaves of plantain, and roots, and mallows, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and make an emollient ointment, such as thyme well prepared, and you take the mucilage of plantain, and cook it with suet or sisam oil, and apply an ointment to it; or you take figs, fat them with hog's dung, and grind similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is reduced by continuously rubbing with moist hands for a long time. And movement should be assisted in the limb every hour.Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.
And if the crookedness is woke and hardened like stone, and needs to be cut out with iron, then it must be covered up to the bone, with a sharp incision made lightly; and put bandages and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, one must now bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, the area will swell and possibly become infected at the site; therefore, one must not move it during the time that it is swollen, as this often brings about pain and other discomfort.
Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, and then let it be, until the abscesses drain; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each part as the healing progresses back to its proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the jaws
Then the jaws become dislocated, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little pushed out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped in speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through several dispositions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly without delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed, so as to achieve equality; and instruct the patient to soften and move his mandibles in all parts.
And she looks at the mirror, as long as it returns to its place.
And if the jaw is dislocated, especially if both jaws are together, then they should be treated with hot water and oil, as long as they are gently reset; do not pull hard to reset it, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet cloths moistened with rose oil and wax on it, then bind it lightly with soft ligatures.
And the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be raised between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor should he exert himself by talking, but should eat soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are set.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the mandible is well bound and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be returned to their place in an hour, and are not converted to their own place, then fevers and accustomed sods come, and by chance a solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is destruction; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.If the mandibles are not reduced in time, death will follow, as we have seen happen many times.
of the fork
The forceless one cannot dislodge it from the ribcage within its path and from the foot, and it is dislodged sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly.
And the shoulder which is towards the ribcage cannot be dislodged; if it can be, and if it returns to its place, as we have said, then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is returned when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: the first is at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates above, and that seldom happens.
And it does not dislocate behind towards the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it is very quick; but in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates slowly and goes back slowly.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Then you must test it to make sure, and then begin the treatment.
And you will know that there is a dislocation when it points downward toward the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one; and you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find a pit at the head of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the base of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the base;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to treat when it is new, or when the child is ill.
And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back down; this should be done quickly.
And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given a soothing and softening ointment, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and marsh-mallow in water, and should be massaged.
Then the patient should be laid on their back, and a soft pad placed under the shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard; then the assistant puts their heel on the pad, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the affected hand;
and another minister dyes the head of the patient so that it does not move down; that shoulder comes back right away, and if you see that he dislocates it according to this way:
and you must have a man present who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the shoulder, and push his shoulder underneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs from the arm; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can use something heavy with them, and the dislocation comes back right away.
And it is dislocated in another way as well: a long rod is placed upright in the ground, whose height is equal to the palm of the hand, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then his hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place slowly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a brand of two yards long and four inches wide, which has the tip bent at an angle to fit into the shoulder joint according to this shape:
then tie a soft cloth to the tip of the brand so that the brand does not strike the patient; then place it under the shoulder joint of the patient, and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the brand, and the arm at the hand, then place the arm on a wooden board, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you must then place a woolen ball under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster of flour from the mill, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then tighten it under the joint gently, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the hand remain like this.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limbs are healed, for he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not柔軟, then he is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that it has encountered, or for any other reason, then you should administer cauteries to three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocations which are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and heal until it is healed.Et si li nerf ne puet estre en son leu, adonc covient qu’il fie estrit a la coine, et li membrez remuez, et li nerf estenduz; et si il n’est pas sanez, adonc covient que tu le vives, et le menes en li lieures; et si il ne puet estre en son leu, si covient qu’il fie estrit a la coine, et le membrez remuez.
And if after the healing there is cramping in the limb, and later with movement, then the patient should be bled many times until that cramping is relieved and returns to its former nature.
of the shoulder joint
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns by pins; and if it is dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is misaligned, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as the abscess has broken, for if the abscess breaks, it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death may come.
And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands from the wrist according to the elbow, around and underneath, and push the joint into its socket at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front, it will return when he bends his hand towards his palm, and puts pressure on the wrist which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold the hand, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it;
and when he sees the joint of his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint properly, until it heals.
and when it is in place, he should apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then loosen it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not setting well, repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days until it is set firmly; then loosen it.
And if he feels grating after the setting of the joint, and it moves, wash and massage it well, and press until it is relieved; then apply a poultice of fat mutton to the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the bandage, and then enter the bath; and do this .ij. or .iij. times until he is healed; and if you see, place moist cow dung heated with butter on top, and hold it there; it will return to its proper state.
dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
And the method of returning it is to place the affected hand on a table, and the assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor applies pressure to the joint, and holds it there until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the correct position; then place the patient's hand on a table, extending and bending it. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient lie on his back on the table, and the examiner places his hand above the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to soothe abscesses, and leave it like that without moving it again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after a few days, then let the joint remain crooked;
and does the patient no harm as long as the hand is weak and cannot grip anything; then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries. There is nothing else to do but to cauterize around the wound, and by chance there is nothing else that can be done.
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster that we have described, then hold it and leave it for five days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il a aucune estresse par la main, si le moille d’aigue fraiche et le frote, et met sus l’emplaustre que nous avons dit; car il ne doit pas demourer longuement en tel estresse, mais estre remu en aigue fraiche, car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit longuement en telle estresse.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist;
then they are put back in place, and the joint is held in position until it is healed; then the head of the shoulder is supported and moved towards the direction of the dislocation;
and let it rest for a day and night, then reset the joint; and every night, as we have said, dislocate it, and move it, then bind it up at night, and every morning loosen the bandage and move the limb, and do this repeatedly until it is healed.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as before until it is healed; and do the same for dislocations elsewhere.
the dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death comes quickly.
And the signs are that the excretions pass out without conscious effort, and he cannot hold them in, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, or both legs, or an arm, or just one.
And often the spine is split into four parts; that which is split in the back is called "split spine":
The cure is to find out if the hernia has come from childhood; there will be no cure or healing from it at all.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of cure with great words, there is not much benefit in them at all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the hernia that comes from the front, there is no cure or healing.
and also those who are struck directly from both sides and cannot be cured unless they are properly struck in the back as I said;
and it is that the illness be stretched out on his face in one equal place and has an extension under him so that he does not get hurt;
then insert one brand into the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the sores of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
and let them be well-closed, the fire cautery as we have said, and the patient place his palms on the spine, until he feels better.
And if it does not improve with this treatment, take a table three yards long, and have the patient lie on his side, and place the head of the table under the spine, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and have the patient place his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he feels better; and if you see fit, do this while turning the neck gently to the side.
And you should insert two fire cauteries into the neck of the patient, one yard long, and two others towards the feet, and have between each cautery, above and below, a palm's width of space;
and has in each stake a hole where the thread runs through, and let the stakes be firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of stakes there is a turning stake, around which the thread turns, and there are two small turning stakes between each pair, each the length of a palm, for turning the thread.
Then tie the thread which is among the stakes to the turning stake towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each of the ministers turns his turning stake along the whole thread, and the master makes the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then apply a dry plaster with egg white, and then the poultices, and then the plate of a three-inch tablet, which is colored purple to match the color of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and treat the patient with a subtle blister until he is healed.
And if nothing happens at the end of the treatment, then one must administer softening and soothing remedies, with the plaster we mentioned earlier; and sometimes one applies a piece of plaster,
and sometimes the appearance occurs in the lower spine, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, so one should not have any presumption: by chance it would bring about death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come from dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and most inside, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot bend his knee by the fire; and the area which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes as a defence, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who it happens to in front, are that his leg is well according to its accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go before, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or straighten his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place under the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure for it; and it must not be allowed to become stiff.
And for that which is the fresh dislocation, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it both inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and does not need any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a very strong bandage, and stretch the leg very tightly with two hands, or with one hand that is tied above the knee; and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then tighten the strong bandage over the thigh; and another tightens the head of the bandage;
and stretch both upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains suspended.
This method of stretching is common in four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the ligament above the root of the thigh and at the base of the armpit, then stretch the ligament upward toward the armpit and toward the underarm.
Then have another assistant grab his arms and squeeze the large area of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is more common than others.
And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong woolen thread, above the heels and above the knees; and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let him be suspended from the head of a staff, with his feet two arms' length above the ground; then command one assistant to hold the top of the thigh tightly, and another assistant hanging with the patient who holds the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said for those with sciatica, and apply a bandage tightly around the affected leg and around the buttock as well.
Then put two hot coals, one at the head and one at the feet; then insert one coal between the thighs into the patient's buttock. and has moist bandages wrapped around it so that the patient does not bleed, then extend each minister towards him, and the one looking at it puts his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on the table and press him as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg gently, and according to what I have said; and put the one looking at it on top of the sore shoulder, then press with the other hand, and they lean down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the sick person downward or lift them up, but they should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on one's side with both hips. and have it over his face, and extend the ligament as we have said before, and someone must press on the joint on the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and constrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then constrain it again as before and leave it for 3 days; then release the bandage and make him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all of these is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull back between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily;
and apply the plaster, and bend the leg at the thigh, and hold them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient walk, until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not set, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when pressed on the part where it is dislocated:
the movements should be gentle, and you should gently straighten the arm with your hands if he has only dislocated it.
And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient stand upright, and press down hard on his leg just above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot upwards firmly;
and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return.
and if he cannot return like this, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a wooden stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wind cloth around him so that he does not move the patient;
then have one assistant hold his thigh, and another extend the foot by hand or with a cord, so that it is pulled towards the head; then everyone stretches evenly, and the stake is held firmly between the patient's thighs to hold him in place as he is stretched;
then let the surgeon hold the dislocation steady with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place with some effort.
And when it is back in place, put on the plaster and padding, and tighten the bandage firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, being careful not to press too hard on the nerves at the back of the ankle.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it again. Then undo it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient go about their business after four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
And if a hot abscess comes, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the arms
When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and that is a minor issue.
And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, you should make the patient lie flat on his back on a bed or table, then press down firmly on the affected joint with your hand, until it pops back into place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then stretch it strongly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let it rest until it is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
and at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to an abscess, and leave the illness in God's hands, if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses heal;
and when the limb is reset to its place, then administer hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound with drying ointments as needed;
and if there is a fracture or broken bones with the dislocation, do as we have instructed in simple fractures;
and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for that will lead you astray according to your Creator, and for the sake of your arms and your body. Amen.
