of the various types of fractures
There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by sword strikes, where the blow removes all the bone down to the membrane beneath the bone, like an axe or a club; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hack".
Or the sword cuts the bone on the surface without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is a blunt impact, or a crack from a blow from a stone, or from falling onto a stone, or similar incidents.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that is visible on the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or similar incidents, and it causes a piece of bone to enter, and the place is dented as potters do when they strike the pots; so the stone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have soft bones in the head, like the heads of children;
and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak of this in its place.
And we recognize all types of fractures by the detraction on them, and the investigation with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The capillary fracture is known by the fact that when the bone is uncovered, and one rubs ink on it, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, pay attention to the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad symptoms, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, high fever, and the eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various forms, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any frightening symptoms, and you hope for healing, then start the treatment.
And when the injured person first comes to you, and it is winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.
And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the membrane beneath the bone is corrupted, and the symptoms we mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part like this: take the head of the injured patient, and uncover the bone in any way you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can,
and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or a hot abscess, then help it with what is needed, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil;
and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed, and you are sure the bleeding has stopped; then start to remove the bone around, and this is done according to two methods: one method is to cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
And then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second method is to have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and work gently, so you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce around it before you make cuts with drills, but not too deep so they do not pierce through the bone of the head, and the drill must have a rim or a circle above the point, to prevent the point from passing through the bone; and you must have several, so that each one matches the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all heads; and these are the forms of the three types of drills:
The method for piercing around the broken bone is to place a drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then place the drill a little further along, and do this all around, then cut with incising tools the thickness of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as delicately as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with some of the instruments you have such as tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the membrane.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, you must then scrape off the remaining roughness of the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incising tools;
and if any small pieces of bone remain, or any scales, remove them gently with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with the probes and ointments we have mentioned.
And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and this is his word.
First you must uncover part of the bone, where the fracture is most apparent, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:
And it does not cut on one side, and the sharp part is on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet on it, so that you cut lightly around the bone, and be very careful of the membrane that is underneath;
if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce the membrane, and the bone is only cut on the surface, and there are small pieces, you must smooth the roughness, and remove the scales with a delicate scraper of which you should have various sizes, to use in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
So start with large scrapers, and then more delicate ones, and continue this until it is smooth.
In each of the other capillary cuts and fine fractures, you must administer treatment according to its alignment; and this is something that is not hidden from one who has studied this art.
And if the membrane is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound;
then take another cloth folded in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so you do not harm the membrane, then apply another bandage over it, and do not bind it too tightly, just enough to hold the wound;
and leave it like this for one or two days, until the hot abscess is soothed, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder of these things, and apply it to the wound, and always apply cleansing medicines without causing pain;
and make sure the wound is always clean, do not leave the ointment on it, nor let any dirt gather on it, for when dirt gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and rots it, and causes great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the membrane, it blackens on the surface.
Be careful then, if any bad symptoms occur to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly dangerous.
And if blackening occurs only because of the medicine applied, which has such a property, then take one part honey, and three parts rose oil and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the membrane;
then treat it with the appropriate methods of treatment, until it is healed.
