Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicine, and the indications, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I have covered this chapter from head to toe, and I will proceed in this chapter in the same way so that one can find more easily what they seek.
And before I begin, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many types of people come for treatments. Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die quickly because of the madness they find in their illness, and from the severity of their malice; and one must be wary of these.
And there are those who give you their opinion and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is treacherous. It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater consideration on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely on that of which you are certain, and from which you can gain profit and praise; and use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients to which health may be converted; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and a memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and may He inspire you with the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what is in the chapter on cauteries, which I have described from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.
