Of the fracture of the clavicle
The clavicle is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of two methods: one is that you take a piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape:
And tie two straps at the two ends, and hang it up, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw the fractured arm over the wood, so that it comes to the armpit, and has in the middle a curvature of wood, then hang some weight on it or the assistant pulls it down; then the physician sets the fracture evenly with his hands together, so that the fracture returns to how it should be.
And the other method is to lay the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants, one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below with a strap, and each one stretches in his part.
And if you see that the stretching needs to be stronger, then bind a strap below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each assistant stretches in his part. And if the fracture is near the shoulder, then you need to place a medium strap under the armpit, and another towards the elbow, below the fracture; and if the fracture is towards the elbow, then lightly place a strap, without effort, until the fracture is even on the spot, and on the elbow; then set the fracture evenly, as necessary, and bind it, if no hot abscess occurs.
And if a hot abscess occurs, do not bind it for seven days, and apply wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the hot abscess is soothed; then bind it, and the method of binding is to apply the poultice on the fracture, then place the arm on the clavicle, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast; and place the cloth, and bind the clavicle, and the arm, so that the arm is in place of splints, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you fear that the bone will move, then use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint a finger's width, and each splint should be so large that it extends three fingers beyond the fracture on each side; then bind the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger and less as you move away.
And if you see the placement of the splints, and the binding, as we said, when you restore the fractured limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound for seven days, as we said; then check every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not occur at the spot, or nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. Adjust it, as we said.
And if none of these accidents occur, then do not unbind it for three days or more, and the patient should sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place under the clavicle a cushion filled with wool evenly, and check every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the fractured limb does not move, or the bandage does not soften; then adjust it with the power of medicine, and give the food we mentioned before, in such a way that the food is initially light; and when it starts to heal, then it should be substantial. And it is customary that the clavicle and the leg should be healed in forty days in total; and then it should be unbound and administer baths and ointments to adjust the spot. And if the structure is ugly and swollen, then it remains unbound for fifty days or two months.
