Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the help and harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of the help and harm is the most complex and subtle science and the hidden secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have agreed on it; and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery universally helps every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion with matter, some have said that cautery is of great help; and others have said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated for hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite says that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement.
For I have found it sometimes by experiment.
And in any case, let it not be taken up except by one who has proven it and who knows through long use the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the conditions and causes of their diseases, and the circumstances and the span of time; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is burned, and harms other members little.
Burning medicines move from one member to another, causing diseases of serious healing to come to the member; and by chance, they kill the patient.
The fire, due to its high quality and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and based on the truth of things; and therefore I apologize for the length of the discourse, for it does not please me to withhold the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on the time when cauteries should be done, and chose springtime.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the arising harm is mitigated by the help of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a time lest greater malice come to the member.
And do not ever think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cautery is a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and it is more effective than medicine because of the speed of its effect, and because of the virtue of its work and its power.
And it is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that a cautery instrument of gold is better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance; and they said that the place of cautery does not become rotten, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I have found it true in some men; and a cautery of gold is more effective than one of iron, as they said.
However, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if you heat it too much, it becomes deformed; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use iron cauteries that we have more adapted to our work.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
