The chapters on abscesses
There are many types of abscesses, as mentioned later in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and there are two types, one in its own form, and one due to the place where it is on the body. For the abscess of the head is different from that of the anus, and the abscess of a fleshy area is different from one that occurs in joints, and each has its own judgment in the procedure.
And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the pus is ripe according to its development; and there are those that must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not mature according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they are rotten around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or the abscess is near a vital organ, and if you delay the perforation until it is mature, it will harm the vital organ; or it is near the anus, so it should be pierced before it is mature; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess that is ripe without completed digestion, except for those near the anus, so it does not rot deeply, and become prolonged within, and develop a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess that is mature according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the fever is gone, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the perforation at the lowest point of the abscess, where it is most visible; and the perforation should be lengthwise along the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no bending.
And in those that bend, along with that member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the perforation until it is fully digested, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, the venomous substance will spread, and it is filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depth of it will harden. And there are some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And you must administer small perforations in small abscesses; and large perforations in large abscesses, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and there are abscesses where you must cut the core, and cut; when it is already like a scab, and is dead, you must do as you do with buboes: and there are those that are split into three angles, and those that are cut like a myrtle leaf, like abscesses of the groin; and those that have a round cut, and other cuts and similar shapes.
Those that have no head, like superficial soft abscesses, you must pierce completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not extract all the pus at once, but extract a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then extract some more; do this many times gradually, until all the pus is out; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old decrepit men. For the spirit sometimes escapes with the release of the pus, and the patient dies, and you do not realize it. Avoid this situation with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a complete cut, administer linen or old cotton tents; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must place a tent in each one so that they come together; and if you have cut part of the skin in the abscess, and you have removed it around, you must fill it with old cotton or linen shavings without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, administer cold water and plantain, and soak a cloth, and apply it to the bleeding area several times. And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in many places in this book, and if it is winter, and the area where the abscess is very nervous, you must apply tents and cloths soaked in hot wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, you must apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then loosen the abscess and wipe and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
