Oh you, very dear sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last in the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have finished it through its expositions and explanations.
And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely, "surgery."
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and completely forsaken, the science has perished and been cut off, with nothing remaining but the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have moved.
From this have come errors and vanities, intentions have been closed off, and science has been distanced.
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I will present the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the addition of their explanation and preparation, as needed.
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is distanced.
Therefore, it is necessary for one who takes it up to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, the number of bones, the movement and veins, both moving and resting, and the location of their exits.
And because of this, Hippocrates says that name with name is much, and with work is little; especially in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the aforementioned things should beware of falling into error and killing people; as I have seen many times those who undertake this science and abandon it without knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman’s neck and cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took away a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
I had already been called to extract it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and along with the break, there was a wound; and the ignorant doctor tightly bound the fracture over the wound with strong bandages and did not leave any room for breath, and left it like that for a time; and he commanded that it should not be untied; and it remained like that until the leg and foot were completely swollen and came to ruin.
I was called to him, and I hastened to untie the leg; and when I had untied it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already established in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until it was completely lost.
And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess that had become cancerous, and then inflamed it further through the malice of his treatment.
For a cancer, when it is pure from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, work where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms with caution, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised; and leave the terrifying diseases of serious healing; and take away your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other in glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about cauteries by fire and by sharp medicine, and the chapter is arranged from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and distortions, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments.
