O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fires except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will vivify it in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will gather together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who undertakes to immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting ones, and where they issue from.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the nose is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he falls into error and kills men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess on the neck or a lump in a woman's throat, and he touches the arteries of the neck; for so much blood comes out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; if he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the patient to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one touched it, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound; and the doctor, due to ignorance, held the breakage together over the wound by strong binding, and did not leave the wound any space to breathe, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be loosened at all; and it remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I saw it was dislocated, he was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wound that burst open an abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is full of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, third son, you are in need to know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you guard yourself against them, so that foolish people cannot speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take up your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the grievous maladies of sorrowful sanity; and lay down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish by the people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and it deals with the forms of instruments, and the ways of performing cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and deals with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and deals with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and usefulness are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and from this speak the wisest of the wise ones, and agree to it; and I suffer few words for them, because I reduce their length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that a hot complexion has matter, and a dry complexion has no matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and the others disagreed: that fire cautery is not suitable for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor through dryness; and he who says the opposite claims that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in this way, no one should interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the happenings and the space of the tenses; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medical cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alignment, and bring about the limb's grievous wounds through sanitation; and by chance, they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is powerful because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not make it excessive, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal to you the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they select the suitable moments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are immediately relieved by the aid of cauterization; and likewise the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater evil may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healed by cautery there is no return; and they say it thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to the speed of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease worsens at times according to the patient's complexion and the place of the disease and its virtue; and they are assembled in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but it happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not true as I have experienced it, and found that it is seen in some homes; and cauterizations with gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they did say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in every way when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make it into fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use cauterization of iron that we have made more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter according to the chief joints just below, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	for fire cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is a remedy made by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solving and modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the virtue and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient rest.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and let your two fingers come there where the blood flows, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make an incision by gently prying and twisting your hand little by little while rotating; then remove your hand suddenly, and re-examine the area if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a bit of silk, and put soft cotton inside, and place it on the affected area, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put a warm compress in a cloth; and leave it there until the wound is opened; afterwards treat the wound of the attachment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancient ones said that the more one delays treating the wound, the more it suppurates; and therefore it is necessary to assist movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery so long above, and thrust so strongly that one removes as much of the bone as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and also since the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and healing for me, and of this use I often assemble salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use remedies such as yeris and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying poultices; and if they undergo the cautery that we mentioned before, but it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below where we said to apply the fire earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making fire cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make fire cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one applies ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those where one makes fire on the middle of the head, and this is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit: then one makes cauteries according to eight manners, that is to know medicine ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and the kernel; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it will be replaced, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then remove it and treat further with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton plug soaked in butter until it becomes porous.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of anointing until it is healthy; and if you see that this is done with some combining medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combining medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of iron, which is its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin where the cautery is applied be burned; and lift your hand so the artery does not become hardened, which is deprived, and decorates abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in oil of sesame, and placing it on the spot for three days; then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then cure the spot of inflammation so that it be healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of touching the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cuts; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you straighten a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of an inch; and it has .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not suitable except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with inflammation and evacuations of head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the .ij. lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple also long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the heat is absorbed; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the resemblance of the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cutter be a little larger; after curing the wound thus as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel called "vasselz" as we have said before, and another cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so be cured thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clarify the brain; after that, place the entire head of the patient in a sinapi plaster, which is written or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauteries within the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the master is, another on the horns, and treat until it is good; and so are the cauteries called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified with years and with what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then do fire cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, do three fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most burning heat is arrested, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure until it is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely suffering and unable to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew food moistening the brain often with good meat; afterwards they take the head in a circle, and do fire cauterization according to what we said before, and fire cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cauterization as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the fire cauterization be olive according to the method I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauterizations as we said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the patient is reposed; after make a well-made circle, as if it were a circlet, and place it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after present the liniment, and take measures against old burdock bruises; and heat the cautery at moderate temperature, so that two fingers can suffer it; after remove the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you see that the fire cautery is done, making many points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain similarly; and then put on cotton wool in a burrow and in the fat of a hen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humecting the head, and ward off all moisture, and make sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding to rear his head, and make him cautery in the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of warmth is at the .ij. eyes together, or in one place where the descent is; and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the efflux of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of powder as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will set it in place; and no one ever cauterizes or touches the two eyes behind.
dou cors des larmes	at the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear as a cold, phlegmatic humor in the head; and one sees that it is superfluous, then I do the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatment, descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or touches behind the eyes; and if there is need for more, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three evil humors; after he raises his head, and make him undergo fire cautery or mild olive tree cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the three veins, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive tree". For it is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that three cauteries are applied on the three veins as long as the veins are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Many times it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in their healthy state; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foliage of a mirror, and it is the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then I put wet cotton in the glare of an egg and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery according to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the affected area which you have marked little by little several times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the skin are that you see the parchment retracted, and the hairs lifted to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton on a wound so that the scabbing is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the parchment is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are fallen out, if you cauterize so that the parchment is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicines are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow so they are great and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living chalk, one .З. each, and mix them well together; and do it quickly, so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the eye's parchment; and if the disease holds in one eye only, you should operate on one, and if it is in both eyes alike, and put under the eye moist cotton in a stream of water; and the head of the patient should be healthy and show your finger pointing to the medicine, and press a little and loosen all the times that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for they feel the sting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made them grow long, then apply medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the mortification has passed, lift the skin of the area, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then apply medicine to the skin again or the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put on soft cotton in a warm place until the bitter courses are chosen, after curing the skin of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you are more skilled than to well guard your operation with great care so that it does not affect the medicine in your eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the skin which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after curing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaves of the dead mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to their constructions; and do not deviate from the right path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and hold the bandages around his head with your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he nod his head; afterwards apply cotton soaked in water or juice of persillion on the wound; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it like a hollow pen, so that it fits the cautery; if you see, if one part is pointed towards the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but anyway, this which is shaped is of no use for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula which is overturned, and removing the putrid matter, and the dryness; and if it is closed, open it, and remove the filth from the wound; afterwards place on the cautery in a hot form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail below the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrodes it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make a quantity of .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the warm poultices do not run on their oil; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton wool soaked in water or in wine: the poultice is suitable for fistula, and the healthy person marvels at its sanitizing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have spoken of, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pustules to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is needed in its own location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks on the lips occur that are called "poils", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert it hastily into those cracks until it reaches just at the font; afterwards treat the bone of cartilage until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes a putrid and rough fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches just at the font of it, and behind the bone; and do this one or two times, afterwards treating what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	two movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery by burning and cautery by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery by burning is such that you take burning coal from a valet, and the tip in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil in burning coal, and place on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it cools; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the coal and cotton in burning cold, and place on the aching tooth, and place on the iron so that the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is such that you take a iron or copper rod, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, so that its form comes from there afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold with your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good coal in the impression of this cautery, and then remove the rod forcefully; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do cautery according to the chief that you would desire, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scalp lesions
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scalp lesions are of cold and moist humors, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery iron from that place, and open two holes for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply a soft cotton dressing soaked in boric powder so that the wound is clean; after healing, treat the wounds with ointments and tinctures until they are healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moist humors prevail on the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicines that dissolve; afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little. Afterwards, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and heal the wounds as we have said before, until they are healthy.
de la toust	of the tonsils
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the illnesses of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or shivering, and it is an old illness, then you make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; and another cautery between the chest and the shoulder blades; and let the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at the entire cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the illness of the ears; and let the poins be just up to ..., or as needed. Afterwards cure the limb according to what has been said beforehand, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is laid on his back and on his side; after you raise the heart which is inside the swollen area with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery iron that has .ij. nodes because it is in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and thus the figure of the cautery is assembled with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery iron that has .iij. nodes, therefore the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery iron that has .iij. nodes:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because it has .viij. cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting fire cautery on the affected areas with silk; then make the patient rest, and do not move their limbs too long so that they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens rarely, then make fire cautery on the thick part of the fire cautery claw, or many cauteries by pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of fire cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old people said that one should make fire cautery for pleurisy of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and heat it over the fire, and apply cautery. Apply one cautery between the ribs and the neck, and two small cauteries a little ways apart on the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly backwards; and one cautery in the chest, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as well as the sides of the chest, which deflects the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press with your hand, but make it open just like a scent.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Here is the translation:
de la mice	of the worst
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the worst of what we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three kinds of cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of the ways is that you make three cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the worst, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has three nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is near the worst, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you raise the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the chest; and so the cauteries should be well near the width of a finger.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's ailment after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the club-like shape that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too much in depth, so the yellow water would be driven out, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on both legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be of a length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries on for a long time without curing, so that the water is expelled; after which cure the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menorhea
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo cautery on the fingers, and apply cautery to each spot, and small cauteries on the stomach below the waist, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all deflected downwards along the almond-shaped and triangularly; and .i. cautery below the anus, .ij. two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then make a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauteries of the key; and let the cautery stay long enough. After treating the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you burn the fleshiness called "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems appropriate, and then apply it thoroughly to the burned "thelul"; and hold your hand so the cauteries reach the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", if you cauterialize each one as we have said; after the treatment of useful remedies, they will be healthy; and if you apply a large cautery to the affected area, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure the pain of a high temperature, which we will describe in its place, then comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Here is the translation:
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman's womb, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other at the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we make many cauterizations in a line, they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and fragile from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery to the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as we need for a cure; and make one cautery above the back, or two if you are in great need; and make clavicle cautery according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to perform .iii. cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ii. cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip joint with a .i. cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you are not present for the cautery, make three cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and cure until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the way of making the cautery is according to three methods: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-tree-based; never make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the method that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cautery be cutellaire, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost there, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called «points».
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, then do more of it; and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was. After a ventosity of the belly from which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parties together, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this way, make a hot iron and let it be at the top as big as an egg from a duck, or a little less, and let it be between the two spaces at a distance of an inch, and let the spaces be above two inches, and let them also be like new ones, and they have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the thigh of the afflicted hip, and turn it around the healthy side; and cauterize once with a hot iron and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is done until it is completely healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its severity, and we see few who use it; and however this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is needed.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other appearances, that one makes on their back, where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer which is called "poins"; and if you see, make two or three cauterizations at the clavicle joint according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the upper spine of the back and in the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you cauterize each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in a twisted manner which is in a spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician properly calls "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, if it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mount of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this method.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make a cautery on each knee, three or four cauteries for each part, all the way up to the olive tree; and if you have more mastery, do more, but don't hold your hand firmer than necessary until the species of the heart is ready.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge the phlegm, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes from anger, and the blood descends to the intestines and it's new, then you should understand that when you want to cure the wound, you must not neglect that day; and he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the fiens descend from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and put it in your two hands, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the finger, and at all a sign that would be similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Here is the translation:
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; afterwards twelve days cure the wound of the burnt area so that the scabbing is removed; afterwards cure other wounds so that they are healthy, and anoint the patient forty days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be relaxed for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And afterwards forty days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made bed prepared for him, and the same for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he exercises little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high pride; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I shall describe afterwards the treatment of surgical wounds in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other parts and are acquainted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make them ready for fire cautery of two or three kinds according to their quantity, and be careful with the third kind of cautery; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the angles of the cautery in this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the limits of the wound and make a line according to its width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized areas. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any member (or limb)
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any member (or limb), or from a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torcions and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommend another cautery on top of that, for it is customary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healthy, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of sickness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The sick are often aided by cautery with great help, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take heed that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor delay, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the sick, then make cauteries on the head: one on the forehead near the nose, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and one on the horns, and one behind on the temple; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the sickness is scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you make cauteries with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and four cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the side, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the rear calcifying, lest you burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you make of cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cautery as long as they are healthy, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the fevers. After healing the wound with flour and honey, and other cures, so that it may be sound.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healthy, then one makes cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure the swelling until it is healthy. And sometimes one makes a cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the inflammation is eliminated; and never bother with it if it is not knowledgeable about the limbs and issues of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "abscesses" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then one cauteries with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is eliminated, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix all together, and bind with a dressing, and apply to the limb until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer begins to appear, and you see it stopping, if you cauterize around the circle that seems to be around the whole of the cancer. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cases of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see hastening to heal: then you cauterize around many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards you leave them thus. For it hastens to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive the entire fire cautery, heat the cautery to the form it is.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery has perceived the heart, and it is such that the cautery is felt by the patient in a manner that the course of the purulence is alleviated. After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a mangling of the members, for it eats away the members just like fire devours dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries gently and strongly, according to what is suitable for the patient or the disease; after cauterying all parts so that you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then let it be for two days, and put cauteries on the limbs suffering from fire with oil so that the burning from the fire is removed, and all corruption. After the treatment, engender scars.  And if you see after two days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this mangling has never been cured by medicine except with the fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that the feet are afflicted by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron like a pen of a vault, and make it of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; afterwards put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of crushed savages boiled with oil, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots. Then cure the foot of ointment by anointing so much that it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by faulty body, and often it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of a vault, and put it on the nail and the surrounding area, that is to say pores and warts; and put the cane so that it pierces all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water deeply until the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot everything from its roots. Thus do one after another, until you clear those that are in the body, then cure the ointments that engender char.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble with cold or nerves, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each vertebra; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive cautery; if they let the trembling, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Not a single time do they appear by themselves in the body without painful pustules, which come from gross corrupt matters. It is necessary at first when they appear that one does fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of fir of myrtle, where the point is taken into fire, or root of aristologist long, or lentricular cautery. And not a single time do they cauterize from the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse afterwards, but are dislodged the superfluities which come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Here is the translation:
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever it happens to nobody, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it steady as much as the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and no more comes out; then apply fire cautery, olive oil, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take .i., great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery steady until the blood is reestablished.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to burst forth when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve that is nearby, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood does not flow from the artery, it cannot be well stanched, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stanch blood; and so be bound and held firmly afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the blood in a narrow place, either by wrapping tightly with cloths or by putting things firmly on, or similar things, does not profit unless it is done promptly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to none and he does not have a better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bend well so that it is reset above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but move the soft part of the arm often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and reset; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter, all diseases require fire cautery or medicine burning, and the instruments and causes and the forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter among the chief just below, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin it, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who hurt themselves with their disease so that they die quickly from the worsening of their illness, and from the greatness of their malice; and from this one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there is one who gives you his sense and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain of, and what you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	a full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this disease often comes from the wet nurse to the infant, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it happens because of a wrong posture that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hasten to death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to abandon the work in certain treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much every day that it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as we need, so that the moisture flows; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make four incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the chief overtly from each part, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside. After that, hold the incisions with drapels and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disperse, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be elevated, and give the patient dry food in moderation, as long as the member is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the abscess opens up, and assemble the water flow; for it is never before, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Here is the translation:
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not benefit at all, then the last resort cure is the cautery with fire that one uses to cauterize the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, to cauterize the veins, so that the patient makes his head fall back; after rubbing the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretching out the patient's neck under the entire cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then mark the eyes of the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument of .ij. inches, until the vein is cut just to the bone, and that is done through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as .ij. fingers deep across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then the blood constantly flows out above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feel, then you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and it is necessary to put out so much blood that it is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of the siphac, if you cut away apostemes that do not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migrating (or wandering)
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the migrating pain comes, and catarrh agitates, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is poorly received by those who are too cold; and if it is received, then they strain their neck from certain drapery, then rub the place of a rough cloth, and raise the place of warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula in the form of:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncinate, then cover that part according to the quantity of the joints. For if it is not covered, then do not touch the wound at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the 6 veins, just up to the 3rd; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you bind it with a double thread of strong silk, which will not allow it to move before the closure of the wound, and allows the flow of blood; then cover the superfluous tissue that is between the 6 ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see, so cauterize with a cautery cutellaire up to the bone as much as the joints are covered; and this is the mother work, if the patient has no fever and it is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is aid to finish the moisture: because it is of great aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when you remove them, if they are cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as soon as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vein your finger so the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood stops, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid burning for too long a time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the .ij. small knives .i. a large space, and then when you have signed on the edges of the .ij. veins, and you place the iron rod burning so much that it comes just to the bone, and cover the vein in .ij. veins; and be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not suitable for this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins that are on the top of the forehead, and it does not benefit from a medical treatment that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel at the front of the walk as if of frenzy; and if they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, it has need of this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it an "old contused cure", and it is that you make a row for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you do three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits going down into the forehead almost to the nose, and the others three digits alongside the edges above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are alongside the edges above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you have prepared a piece of sponge and wrapped it in cloth to suck up the blood, then insert the spatula guided by three fingers from where it is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two fissures up to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge towards the hard cartilage at the bone, and the dull edge towards the bone, and put it in as far as it reaches the mean fissure. And cut through all the veins that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision is continued up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part of the mean incision up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the bone for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moist drapery with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will anoint great plantain water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the evacuation of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a vein is accustomed to flow with difficulty, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is cloudy, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain from an acute disease, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those matters and this catharsis do not come forth except from many veins, and the cure is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one two fingers wide. And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and make the incision just up to the bone; and hold your hand near the temples that move to the vein; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then wipe between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and hold it in place with linen thread; then lay moist drapplings on vinegar and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is opened, you must rub the bone as long as it begins to grow, then treat with exciting things that make it grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parties of flour of wheat, and of colocynth three parties, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to excite growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of these things: either grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing as iron; or seed, as if jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not stick to the ear, it does not grow in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a drop of violet oil or oil of sesame, then you perform extraction; and make a poultice of condiments, and stop up the nostrils when the poultices come, and put pieces of cloth or wool over the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, you perform extraction with subtle pincers, from which the form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, it's good; if not, you perform extraction with a subtle hook of small double curvature; and if it doesn't come out by this, you make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane into the ear hole strongly, and stop up what is around the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then you pull it out in the form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, you take glue from which you take the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not succeed in all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear thus that the abscess bursts, and spasm; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient healthy from the cephalic disease, and extract blood according to the measure of its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until they are healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it inflates, administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a thorn and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then proceed with the gentle extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, then remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrowed below and widened above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, proceed with distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, it is their form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper narrowed below at a small hole, and above opened for distillation; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraping and enveloped around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraping all the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it is the distillations which are warmed by fire, so that they are distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or when a piece of flesh is born inside the ear, and these swellings come many times in front of the ear, if one cannot see it; and many times it happens that the hole becomes small, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes in front, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, then the work has achieved all this spatium of which it is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and even in front and behind all plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is of flesh born or growth of the ear, then you hold as pincers subtly, and lift gently, until this growth is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilations are deeply embedded in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and gently heat it by fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great grief in hearing, perceive lightly, and beware not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the affected area.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not leave it for a day until the wound is dried, or take a tent and apply rose water ointment, and sprinkle vitriol powder; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another ointmented tent made of rose oil and wax, so that the inflammation is removed; then cure until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papyra (paper-like skin)
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are without decay, the fire cautery is subtle and the cautery practitioner, after incision, values highly; and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things that seem like scabs in their form and hardness come from the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the workings are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make the large opening, then lightly scrape each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the skin, do not hurt the patient at all; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it's healthy; and if it's small, don't make any force, for the joints will soon restore and heal.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends from the inside of the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the skin is separated by incision, it does not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the saline water in the oil, and cure the place of what heals the patient's injury as much as possible.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	There is a fatness that is engendered in the membranes of the eyelids above, and this affects more the eyes of young children, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning catarrh, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep there, and their eyelids beneath their eyebrows are moist that the fatness and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers against it and feel the fatness entering within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the surgery is that the patient places their head in your hands; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains of fatness, then place it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fatness is gathered within the circle; then make a small incision in the moisture with a sharp scalpel, and let it not be larger than the wound made for a vein opening; and make the skin deep enough until you reach the fatness; and in many dispositions, fatness comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then extract from there a piece of cloth, charpit between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the incision, lest you reach the entire scalpel just up to the eye, lest you bloody it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase the wound slightly so it opens; then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloths and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break the skin and put on it to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then treat until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with soothing ointments until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of papers are born awkwardly other than naturally, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is due to the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterizing, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, thrust a needle through all of it; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull the thread above all of the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the aligned hairs, all of the spatula coping, from the great mirror up to the small; then extract the thread, and put beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated on the paper which is divided into sections.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a task that requires coping with a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then make all of the spatula on the lines that you have signed, and start from the great mirror up to small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then thrust the hook into one of the angles of the circle, and scrape everything; then assemble the lips to a seam with a needle thread of subtle wool, and suck out blood, and make flow the superfluity of threads on all of the eyebrows to glue things together, if you see fit; and if not, do not have care, then leave the seam and threads up to three days or four; then cure the wound without a seam of dry and constricting things, for the paper revives suddenly at the wound and its assembly, but the seam is mortal (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, to three inches of separation according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads equally; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the lips of the wound by suture, and treat until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and it often happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what appears on the surface of the eye's parchment, and stretch the .ij. caines of the .ij. parties forcibly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which will be stretched more and more and will putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the treatment takes a lot of strength, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the skin is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs; and this is the form of .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt .i. another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it dry in the sun so that the operation is clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then put the needle at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce through the skin hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the hunt, and put into the hunt that hair, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then pull out your hand as much as the hairs come forth at the root of the hair implanted with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes forth through the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then if you draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it stay closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh on top; and if the hairs are small, then accompany .i. long hair of natural whiskers, and raise it with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purification of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the purification of the eye comes into the eye, it has two manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of working on it is that you split open the sutures, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and lace them so they are healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but working with mollifying things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or attar and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapulon founded on none of the eyes, and enveloping a cloth, is the treatment for it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle back into its former shape; and these workings that we have spoken of are only adjournments of this disease, so it does not relapse into its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and fissure and cautery and similar things; and the way of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass from the left arm to the right, so that the threads meet at the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above the entire needle, and cover with a spatula large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is needed, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the papyrus, and make two fissures or cuts within the papyrus; and let the heads of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter that has no "j" grieche; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then use the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from fissure or cutting or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain fissure beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need of operation and of strengthening in more disposals.
dou soudement de la papiere	because of the burning of the parchment
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this burning has affected men in such a way that the parchment above is burnt with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor beneath the parchment, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp or scratching the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled tissue, gently, so that the parchment regains its natural form; and it is entirely healthy, and never again becomes inflamed or irritated, and raises a gentle and soothing warmth, and of collyrium; then place between the parchment and the oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant dressing; and after three days use a soothing collyrium and similar things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and appears like a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous, but appears as a white, congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and pressed with pincers, cannot be moved; and one and the other appearance begins to turn towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all sight and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and he takes the skin with his hand, then curves the finger like small pincers, and holds it above; then take a needle, and I put horsehair or cow hair or beef thread on it, strong and firm; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and hold the finger with a thread and hold it above, and remove all the hair from the side of the finger which touches the skin and the vein just to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the artery, subtle and with small forces, and let the natural skin or artery, so that by incision does not disturb the course of the veins accustomed; and never does the finger get stuck on the nail solely, and on the thread, as we have said; then remove all the skin subtly, which is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the artery does not touch the raw skin and break it, and that the vein is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little warm broth into the oil, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as it can be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the veins cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see the cover, then open the oil from the patient, and take the subtle artery slightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at all and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the collier made of litargy and two red collars and brocade, and stop the eye just until the next day; then restart the other treatment according to this same work, as long as it is completely exhausted.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the eye, then as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then restart the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh shows great harm in the eye during the night, then suspend it on the ninth [note: probably a mistake, should be "oncle" meaning uncle or ninth is not clear], and cut off a part but not entirely, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collier made of litargy.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Here is the translation:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distilled red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with water from an egg, so it may be assured against hot abscess; and if nothing remains, and the wound does not mount, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make a good scar in the eye by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you adjust the treatment according to the natural weakness of each eye; and the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	from the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its work and blind it completely for two years. It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which they are, if they are strong, and there is no other disease besides lou sebel; then you bind it in this manner: command the patient to put their head on your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be an eleven-inch incision by degrees in this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you coil the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and suck out the blood hour after hour, until you see that you remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not grasp more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and is free from hot abscesses, then resume according to this method which is presented before, so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the decay and blackness, if it returns to its entire instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it was made from iron into a .i. chief reont, and it should be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two [hands], and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having excitative properties.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are swollen, and there is pain, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by medicines aqueous, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at .iij. angles, and let the fust be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the bone of the armier, and slide your hand from the oil .i. little, then turn to pierce the bone entirely so that it feels the pain through which the veins come in this way if he holds his hand under his nostril; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the pain is felt and endures the joints, so one sees the matter at the nostril; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor diminishment, then it is necessary to lift the patient; then the healthy one, then apply poultices or ointments without piercing to suck, then put on the eye .i. make a mixture of vinegar and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and bind with bandages and drapels; and the way of the drapels is that you take very soft ones, and double each in three, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity the eyes need; then hold it firmly with a strong bandage, and reapply the poultices to suck without piercing; then remove the poultices and let the eye be steady day and night, and if it becomes weak, then it is necessary to strengthen it more; then remove the binding after a day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that's good; if not; then reapply the bandage and drapels and the poultices until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven fabric, then open, and comes from papers as if .i. grains of resins, and it is astonishing to see; then if you see the weaving, the works are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below up to the one above, then put another needle where there is .i. double thread of the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie a part of the weave around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put on the eye again moistened with abundant use; and let it be until the threads are joined with the weave, then heal the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and no time the wound is held back by the weave each part of a circle of drap, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they perceive in the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends into the eyes, and inserts itself thus; then it will be straight until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the hollow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a hollow in the eye, appearing to be descending and not being descended; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the hollow coming above your eyes; then it will be fixed, and does not descend or become disordered, and you see the patient's things as they should be; and if it does not descend thus, know that it is descending, and if the descents of the hollow are not arranged as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and place it on the cornea .i. a little through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the hollow is; and when it is thus, distill in the eye warm honey mixed with milk, or warm fenugreic boiled with milk, then be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the corners of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After rest .I. a little, and if the water rises the second way, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract slightly in turning your hand slowly; and then put back into water a little of the gemstone, and leave this oil within. Then put by default the oil is stirred or mixed with oil rose and abundance of egg, and bind with the healthy oil.  We, and those who are of our time, put thus common broiet with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is the form.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva subtly, and do not go too deep in the fontanelle, but make it a subtle layer, then put the almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient who is sleeping on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be laid out according to his disposition until the third day; then dislodge him from that dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put him back in place until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do not do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, for this water mounts hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	The aposteme wounds come, that you dislodge the eye before the seventh day, and address the one who soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then dislodge the vision and put on his face a little golden ring to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and settle into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made an almond piercer, to which one sucked the water, but I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of amputation, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly prepared.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of the bone in this subtle precision, and the last one at three angles aigu.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never born or nose scars diverse, because there are some that seem scorpions at the foot of the legs; and if there is such a color as fox-colored flesh, and if it has bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these scars which are soft, and not enshrined, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sunlight; and open their nostrils, and apply the onion to those scars, and burn them with fire; then hold that spatula subtly gutted on one side, so that you know that that scar is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything, i.e., the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without mounting above, or abscess appears, drain it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then throw away or anoint with oil or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose is closed, and moisture comes up to the palate, it shows that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as needed, it shows that there is a new flesh in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then it is necessary to use .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about a span .i. a thumb or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in their nostril as they can, and draw it out by smelling it so that it comes through the nostrils into the mouth; and many times children do this as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head coming through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming through the mouth with the other hand, and guide one after the other while smelling us who are on the thread. Do this until you see that the nose has corroded that flesh, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and anoint the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reset it in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a tube of poultice in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it while one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease occurs on the skin above the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large soon, so it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must take measures at the beginning, and remove everything far, then put above the skin the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying until it be large, take heed if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can completely remove, then beware of the patient and remove their fear, and cure the skin of dry and withering things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is affected and ulcerated
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You know that when continuous suppurations come in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for there are none in some homes. Then you must take care so that this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then you join the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure until it be healthy; and if the leaves are already separated from one part and another, you must scrape all parts of their root until they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and remove, and sprinkle with powder made from dragon's blood, and incense burnt; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it be healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the cost is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the cost of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of vetch, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each knot, and take them with pincers and cut in each part; then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol burnt, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of iris, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gums are inflamed where they are attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you support them with bandages, and apply a remedy to their root, and let the blood or sap flow; then put on the vitriol broth, or other powders that restrain and dry; and if that gum returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you apply the remedy a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for coping.
des sordens	Of the abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are black and bitter and green, as long as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are putrid; if it is necessary that you take the patient's head between your hands, and their jaw should be steady, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, so that nothing remains; and thus make a remedy for blackness and greenness and jaundice and other taints, so that they are cured; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay doing so for as long as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very delicate substance up to the point where one has no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained by two tiring efforts, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain deceives the patient, and thinks it is a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth hurt; and meanwhile the pain does not depart from the bad one, as long as the evil strain lasts, because we have already wanted to do this for those who are well; and when you are quite certain of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary that you excavate around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to ward off the gum from every part; then you put it in your fingers or subtle pincers at first slowly and slowly, so that it be well loosened, then you firmly grasp the pincers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the teeth are decayed and loose, it is necessary that you fill them with plugs, where the holes are; and if you extract subtly with pincers, so that it does not break while extracting; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who by their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not remember what we have recounted; but they often come to the occasion of this great disease through the roots that they leave behind, or through the instrument that they break, as we have often wanted; and when the tooth is decayed, wash it with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, apply the wine of vitriol broth; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the traction, then it is necessary that you place on the cotton wool moistened with borax. i.e. one day or two., until the limbs are ameliorated, then he puts on the pincers which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus like a file and that is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue from all these pincers, then it is necessary that you discover the flesh entirely surrounding the root, and he puts on the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a palate scraper, from which this is their form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then you help with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has several grooves, from which the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of the dens' ratio, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be these instruments strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the dens' instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments; and it breaks no cartilage or bone, or it corrupts, if one searches for these instruments that it needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and support; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it needs to be known that the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot straighten or file: then take the root; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small iron hook bent into a point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping is little by little in the morning hours for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file as its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the morning hours lightly, so that it does not move until it settles; then the plane at the end has no roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it needs to be filed to be even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the front tooth aches, whether by percussion or by decay, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if they need to be restrained by a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rotten, but gold ones do not move at all; and let the moderate-sized thread not be too big nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double it between the sound teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, even if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so they do not move at all; and let your binding be at the root of the tooth so it does not escape. Then cut the heads of the thread with a tool, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and set it so it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the gold thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays in place and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of adjusting the sound teeth and the bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and do not intervene with those who are not skilled and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth like an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	It never happens that the threads which come from under the tongue or naturally, are not born thus; or by accident of a wounded wound; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous thread as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the uncinate and cut the large ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the water of rose and of hazel, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot sleep. And if bad blood comes out, apply vitriol ointment on the spot; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that the color is dark or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer; and if it declines to a bluish color, and there is moisture, apply the onychine, and make a subtle spatula-like instrument, and deliver one part and another; and if the wound does not heal with your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything completely; then lift the water of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Here is the translation:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part and naming from another part; and when you have taken hold of one of the embers, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with warm water, or apply crushed green apples that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other abscesses arise in the throat except those .ij. embers, if you take hold of them thus as the .ij. embers heal.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located deep in the throat, which is to say .i. small abscess; and it had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. passages of the nose. I hastened to treat her then, and made an incision in one .i. ounce, then made a large opening, and a great deal of pus flowed out; then I made another incision in the other passage of the nose, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue; afterwards I made an incision into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the passages of the throat were cleared for the woman, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in the throat: thus it remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it in the air, and make it bubble; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and let it have an instrument that filters according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the small heads be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, frequently repeat this, until the eye dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscess, for many things occur; and do not do this unless at the decline of hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a small hook of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the small hook of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether salutary.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; thus you must try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will pull it out again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument of pliers according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it all becomes useless, nor does it close inside; and it is of no value that the patient inserts the instrument, because it is inserted or the thing is upside down; if it is inserted below, where it draws everything equally along the entire instrument, as long as it is equal.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the sensitivity of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine can cure the sensitivity, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit, then gaze into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle forceps worth that. And if it is of no value, take a curved hook, and insert it into the patient's throat, then hook or curve of the hook in iron, and make it so often. And if the patient is seized by water every day, then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and swallow as much as they can, and move their hand often; and if you feel the sensitivity feels the cold, then vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not vomit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphaltide, at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will clear the sensitivity. And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered by a perforated cloth in the middle, and in this perforation let there be the head of the instrument; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will clear now, and if it does not vomit, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then the patient will be cured by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, resembles a curved tenaille entering the neck; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see there the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many types of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in cutting; and it is in twelve manners where one is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the eyes or they are on the body. For the abscesses of the chief are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them so long as they are porous within, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because it is a cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is mild, it will harm the principal member; or it is of the foundation, you pierce it thus so it is mild; and it is not necessary to pierce crude abscesses without complete digestion, unless that which is of the foundation, lest it should rot within, and become fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departures from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debating and of the agreement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the long of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all equal whether there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, if the body is filled with much bad matter; and by chance they harden the veins and the depths of it. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the members that have need of them.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed beforehand in the treatment of abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the masters of chief wounds come from small abscesses, and are ways for us that are in tiles, just like the joiner of a gauze, and much in it has similarities. There is fat and suchlike where there is moisture as in poultices; and if there is such which are hard and piercing to the cutter, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary. And the works of the cutting are that you prove all .i. instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes hereafter, what thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, if you make a poultice above the wound. And when the moisture is voided, if you scrape without leaving the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and in vinegar, and apply to the wound, and let it until the next day; and this corrects what is delayed of the night. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay of the night; then cure the wound of ointment in a suitable way, so that it be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, if you cut according to this form, from the wound; and you throw away the outer layers, and scrape all parts, and put all your care into piercing for the skin where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, if you do what I have told you after. And so do with the abscess if it is piercing, and of the cutter and of curing just as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting on the piercing abscess and moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and of these .i. abscesses that I cut or wounded an old woman; and found the abscess just like a pierced stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had made a poultice, one would have done as well to wound as to pierce. In other abscesses coming from wounds, for those that come from children and roots of ears, the treatment should be delayed at least three days, depending on the evacuation of the bowel; and the cures are necessary as it is convenient.
des scrophules	of the scalps
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times an abscess occurs at the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groins, and sometimes it comes to another part of the body, and they are numerous, and are entangled with one another. And each scalp is properly within its side, just like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scalps are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malign ones that do not wish to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition on the touchier, and it seems similar in color to the body, and changes from each part and is not airy as near the neck nor at the artery, nor at the conduit; it is not deep; so it must be cut above, and the skin of each part, and the .ij. lips of the heart are like onions, if you have mastery, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take a little and a little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not let it be too shallow, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into a vein or an artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriolic plaster, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, until you accomplish it; then ask if there remain any small scalps, if they are cut and mended. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scalp, it does not matter that you cut into that scalp at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scalp, it is necessary that you assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no excess flesh due to the greatness of the scalp. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and draw forth, and sew as we have said. Those scalps that hold excess flesh, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce thus like before mentioned, depending, then amenistrating with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well mended, cure it with ointment in a jar, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of bruising
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke and talked of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to puncture the epiglottis, that we puncture it between two or three circles or with a small puncture of the traverse, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the puncture of the syphac, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is convenient to section the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage point, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire oncin, then puncture the heart as far as it reaches the trachea; and evacuate the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut into the syphac, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the trachea which breaks forth through the broken place, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the open wound heal a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed where one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a good heart, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One must not do this just as long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default gives up the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one must cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore we instruct the old one to let the open wound be as large as possible so that the evil of the disease passes, and it has passed in three days or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they instruct to cauterize the wound and treat, until it is cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the tendons of her arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found him nearly dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered, neither vein nor artery, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I had nothing against the young woman for she was rough from voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any obstruction.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is of two kinds, one is similar to a abscess that grows in us, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate on fierce fires except in the one that is small, and it tries and searches throughout the entire intromission.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find them thus as an abscess grows, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if it bursts, if we burst them like we do, and it draws to its entire cofa, if there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search thoroughly everywhere, and heal it as it seems, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of us, which I will describe all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and therefore it is suitable that I should say all the differences that exist between them and us.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the patient is hot and feverish, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accomplished by the putrefaction; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth node, it has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the juice of the fig, which is its own sap and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a bud, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to the similarities, whether dry, or moist, and many colors are like I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take or make more moist the vein that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this, so it knows how to force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moist corpus runs short, which has its color, thus they do as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromissoire no moisture comes, it knows it is fat, thus they do then in a cross, and take it as pincers, and gently scrape off each part and turn the cotte where you think it is healthy with the nouement;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it healthily, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he remains nothing, thus returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, thus apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put above soothing warm abscess treatments, and heal other wounds as long as he is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great to us, thus cut the edges of the wound, and heal those that are injuring flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or otherwise, thus apply to it a mixture of vitriol and broiet, and let it stay two or three days, as long as the wound festers, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which was removed from the nut.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sores, and are of citrin material, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, being more experienced at piercing the fistula's curves;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three kinds: large, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the scissors are very similar, as you see here: large, middle-sized, and small; and if there are scissors that have three curves of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are scissors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and if there are scissors that have two curves, and some with only one curve, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is so sharp that they cut, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which the nails are scratched, because one does not touch the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers are the elevated limbs placed in harnesses, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three manners: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use more than the flesh of a carnage, such as legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to scissors for fisticules, according to this form, where one stains blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it nowhere near the place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and nowhere near according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Nowhere near do the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of women;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they become weary and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is suitable to treat them according to this form of this line, right up to G.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in a warm bath, then assemble the two lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and he massages the injured shoulder low down, and it is ameliorated by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make an ".ij." in the ribs above, through similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and amend what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it grow as much as it eats the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to bring healing to those who are wounded.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it becomes swollen, then often abscesses come, and similarly it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes them thus, as it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep-rooted.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel estrangement; and when it is for the vein, it seems to be distant appearances;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, and similarly when it is under the bones and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the treatment must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, it is done above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the incision at the onions, and beautifully detach the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then push the needle underneath, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then prick the vein that is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular (vein) as long as the blood flows out of it, and so be free from the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply a treatment that will cause the wound to suppurate, until the ligature falls off;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the affected area with ointment, until it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is on the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to the whole skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, if you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one ties a knot with double thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then insert another needle under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three layers;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cauterize the abscess until the excess matter flows out, then cauterize the surplus that remains and let what is bound together remain.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a dressing of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nostrils
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, how abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come into the nostrils when they are inflamed, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is strained forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deeply in the body, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be well examined from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and he who is in the joints does not wish to be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin stretch to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, you hold it with thumb and finger, and cut at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, you support it with a clamp, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No time has it in the stomach and not another part of the body, and it is an illness that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had .ij. in his belly which was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little roots, and was cut open, and corroded again with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you examine if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you cut into the spatula widely, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not take care, then hurry to give the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of wool, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for 8 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of splints as long as it covers the joint; and work through it without strain; and if the roots are thick, so fear not to cut in the middle for the belly, but you can well cover half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not become inflamed; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of false color and of poor sensation and of lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is ripe
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the intestines, just as it has in other routes, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the route of the skin and by the exit of the belly, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, it does not constrain; and if it is by blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in this chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from below around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go beneath the level that you have marked at all the spine.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then stop at half of the abscess above all the large ulcer.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it beneath with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and be the ligature strongly attached.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open half of the abscess extended above the ligature, and thrust your finger inside, and explore the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you have taken a prisoner of the liaison, if it dislocates, and puts the intestine behind the belly's defect;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you take the bowel, if it takes to the navel, and covers the excess flow;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, if you go deeply inside, then return to your work and take nine needles, and put nine forces filaments, and put the nine needles inside what you have done in a cross that you make pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the belly absorb as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you hold the scalp when it is subtly affected and porous, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what needs to be cured, and sew up the limb.
dou chancre	because of an ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of ulcers, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron; and we say that an ulcer is in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be scraped away like an ulcer which is in the muscles, and in similar limbs, and it must be completely removed when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter if you approach it, for I do not know how to heal it; nor did anyone ever heal one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments, when it is in place or can be treated, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make him healthier if he shows obvious repletion, then prepare the patient for the treatment; then cut away your ulcers or tumors, and shave all parts, and scrape off all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the area with your hand or anything, and see that the flowing of blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it is clearly stated; and one must not touch iron in these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as pain in the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iii. two fingers directly above the navel; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iii. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then make it on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's gaze falls upon the incision lest the superfluous ones do not flow towards the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the syfac as if scraping out a quantity of an inch or a finger's width; then pierce the syfac until the spatium comes into view, and that is the width of the aqua, then draw the thread, and it is the form of this instrument which is: And it resembles a subtle silver tube, and is made of lighter archaic materials, and has a small perforation at its tip; and on one side, two perforations; and three on another side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which the writers shape their pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top above is the scalpel, so that when the instrument comes to the aqua, then descend now on the instrument; take away the donkey's load, or about half or a third part, for if you remove more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient might die from the resolution of his spirit of arms, or he becomes pale, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but take away according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then draw the instrument and hold back the aqua, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the perforation which is on the syfac, as I have spoken, so you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the aqua a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Here is the translation:
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born with punctures in the rod, or the puncture is small, or it is not in its place. If you want to pierce it at all, it must be very subtle according to this form: then put a very subtle thorn of a thistle, and bind it thus for 2 or 3 days, and when he wants to urinate, if the opening is closed, and he urinates, and then puts it back; and by chance it does not close, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose puncture is small, it is medicated with a thorn of a thistle, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the puncture in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the puncture at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod high; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the surgery is that the patients lie on their back, then the head of the rod and the cope are as big as a pen, if the puncture is in the middle, as it wants; and beware of the efflux of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood which flows, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with subtle onion juice, and clean and wipe all, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cauterization. When you have cleaned it, and the cyst is on the surface of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then treat what is outside. For when you treat them together, it is not assured that the area of the penis will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come to his penis or in the groin; it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which has been made with scorched pomegranate seeds and veins, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, it is necessary to apply lunar cauterization in this form: The cauterizations aid in these dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and against corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert or guide a lead pipe into the penis, and urinate through it; and when the skin is worn away at the head of the penis which has been circumcised, or it has been wounded by an abscess, or it has been wounded by a plague, it is necessary then that you scrape with a sharpened instrument, so that the ligaments are loosened, and the area of the penis is delivered from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrub the spine with a .i. spatula in the manner of a small stick from the top of the rod and the skin; then separate boldly between .ij., and I put .i. subtle drapery of linen moilliet on a cold aqueous, so that it does not become stiff again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not one of the minor injuries; however, when we perform this work with our voluntary effort, and properly in children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the thigh, and with forces, and in all novelty; if they hastened the courses because there are two tiles, and by chance if one covers this on top and delays that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they recover the cooper, and the pain is double, and in the purification which is two fingers from the unsure point of the limb; and in the purification of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times it does not need purification and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with forces at all the thread of the wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all soul tenses; but that the thread should be well stretched around the skin; and so is the manner of the first operation if it is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than tying the thread around the rod as gently, and then you make it relax in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or stir, and pull it high until the head of the rod is in place; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled, then tie the rod signified by a double thread, then tie below another thread; and hold as you should do by the second threading to the pouch and to the index finger, and cope between the threads, then lift the stir above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil of glue made from a measure of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally measured mains.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the heart deep inside is cut into; then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the abscess forms equally, and the bandage similarly, and if you cannot hold with your finger, take the tendons and then the bandage.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it surpasses three days, and what is underneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess pain is appeased, and gently scrape off; then bandage as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, that will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound of sudden injuries with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you bandage too tightly outside the measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of a blow, or of a new wound, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is above or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and hold the patient steady as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, because the urine is not flowing;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of subtle silver, light and veined, like a bird's feather; and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and it should be subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the tip of a flax or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and stop up the superfluity of the flax and tie it just at the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or burre and album of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and of oil of olives and of aqua teda.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then more lightly place the syringe in the rod, as far as it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the bud; then push the syringe forward until the vein, and feel the patient come up to the clear thing, and this is not done according to this order because the conduct or it was twisted; then stretch the thread little by little along the entire length, and the urine follows the length, then extract forcefully, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and reintroduce the syringe until the vein is empty, and relieve the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the vein, where putridity is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if made on all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	Here is the translation:
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cautery in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cautery, and then strongly pull back the pulling inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of the cluster that one uses to clusterize the bladder: if it is thus;
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or of steel, and the head is higher; and below the .i. breast or the loins are injured; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you saw clusterize the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the form of a double twisted thread, and heat .i. piece of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the cluster in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture comes out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has just come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. deal, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle subtlety; and it openly hurts, and gravely afflicts the patient's penis, and they often faint, and then become paralyzed; and many of these jumps are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old men, and it's as if it were a middle age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient thoroughly by cleansing, in order to expel all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move to the bottom, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and does not rise above the waist at all; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then touch and feel from there.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the bladder, hurry now to cut into the stone. And if it does not touch all around, bend your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and push into its foundation, and feel the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, place it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin that is below the loins in the part where the cutting is done; then he places the spatula-shaped instrument, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make a passage between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left nave; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers are together at the foundation, and be the cutting through the traversing so that it is large by default, and inside is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Here is the translation:
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Here is the translation:
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	Here is the translation:
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then remove the patient from his bed, and do not disturb the bandage just until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of diafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses and corroding come in the wound, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without discharge with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the corrupt blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it rotten.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound with water and honey and silk, and aid him in all the ways that you know, until he is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the kidney is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; so the treatment of this thing that I say thus, that you cut many times, is to excuse the cutting per this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Here is the translation:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take the fil and lay it beneath the verge against the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the forefinger lightly into the verge until it reaches the stone; and turn the forefinger in your hand in the stone slowly, so you can feel the stone from another part; if the urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the verge. If it breaks thus, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this due to any obstacle that hinders it, then place the fil beneath the stone and another above, then make the verge between the stone and the joints, then extract the stone, and release the bond, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it be sound.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Little does it happen that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens at any time, then the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires deeper cutting, and great fear has to be had.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to remove it from there, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle caste of mirror; and it presents a wise life among women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to make her thrust her finger or foundation and extract the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it beneath her finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in a circular motion.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it slowly from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft part of the con, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let the cutting be the first small one.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then put the iron in the waist, so you feel the stone if it grows on the wound as much as the stone can come out forcibly, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those which have roots. If you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if you feel it weakening, put the vitriol ointment on the spot, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as men will help you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you feel it weakening, and it is of the artery that is cut, put the powder on the spot and strain with tente and bendelz, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the spots are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the intestines, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the intestine between the white syfac that we have said; and they do not have a small non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is from the weakness that comes to the intestines, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a declining yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white and smooth as we have said, so are the abscesses red, like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, so are the abscesses red with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white smoothness, so it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should examine all the internal parts carefully, for that is how the shape appears before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the examination, judge from what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should sweat on his back, on a somewhat elevated thing, and put many towels under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he should sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the heart near the sides.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the sides within the length just up to the navel, and let the incision be entirely straight in cutting the skin of the sides up to the white spot, and scrape subtly according to his power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the white spot plain of water at a large perforation, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and extend the white spot above; and do not touch the heart of the sides, but let the white spot be the only thing that is extracted; cut out completely or in pieces the ribcage of him subtly, so that if you do not cut it well skillfully, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the vein is inflamed because of excessive heat, set it back in its place when you have completed the work on the affected area; then assemble the .ij. leaves from the heart of the joints into a dressing, then treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then touch the joint to all the suspended parts, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equality, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a mild ointment made with oil rose.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another mild ointment made with wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put double-layered bandages on top, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two bandages, and fill them with lint according to this resemblance and sew them together at the neck of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thumb; and another head takes hold on the two angles, and so the entire restraint is assembled in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at no time is medicine made from this branch of cautery in the shape of an iron rod, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the agua is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this method, and pierce the skin with eleven points, and scrape it with this subtle burning cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And burn the skin in all ways that you can, so that you clear everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg whites; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the decay of blood, and worse than the operations of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you contrario, or abscesses burst or decays of blood or other thing, so cure what makes you contrario, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this operation due to its horribleness, so perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it be for a while to correct the remaining defect of the water, then cure until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and let the white cloth not allow the water to exit through the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument by which one draws out the water of hydrops, because its shape is thus before; and enlarges .i. a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or nearly a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in more dispositions, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from running or riding, and also from blows; and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive anger and anguish, which is spread through blows or percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no lack of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are painful abscesses, greenish and reddish in color, and sometimes they come from a narrowing of the artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from an inflammation of the vein is recognized by its disposition and the expression of tenderness to the touch of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well perform the cutting on this similarity, and on the other flesh.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then stretch the vein upwards, and make a white scar, and release the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already swollen with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the scar, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back of the hand, then it is necessary to cauterize all of it, and hold the finger steady, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, and afterwards treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the entrails
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like swelling resembling a .i. pustule, with the softening of the entrails,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient's wound should heal quickly when it is seen;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is well suited to be careful with, just like that beforehand.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in every way we will direct you to work on it, according to what the ancient people did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a chair or stool, then place the suspended cord of the joints below your two fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the penis, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcefully;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut into the spatula-shaped instrument deeply through the place of the vessels, as long as they are uncovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape away from each part, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint or vein that comes into view, and then tie it again to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they cut in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out corrupting humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as others do, by putting a bandage, so that no vessel bursts and nourishes one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	about the treatment of swelling
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are through the passage that comes from the swelling, or the extension on the belly in the region of the intestines, because the intestine descends from that treatment to one of the cavities;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from the swelling, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a bruise, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the swelling, are that it comes on slowly and gradually, in long tension, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses even up to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness against the swelling of the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments of fear, because they think they will escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert their intestine with their hand into the wound, if they can re-enter it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the conjunctions from the loin.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then thrust deep into the loins of the wound, according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that your eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the dead skin which is under the skin of the joints, so that the white skin beneath becomes uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white skin beneath which is under the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin around the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high, and dislodge what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and look to your fingers if there is a point of the intestine wrapped around or white and dry, and if you find nothing, then thrust it into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or one having a large thread made of ten threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the dry skin, which is after the skin of the loins; after the girdle, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the dry skin, which we have said is beneath the skin of the loins, with a strong thread of two threads;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess forms and putsrefies there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and set the bandage according to the first bandage long and equal, and after these bands let two fingers which is below the hollow of the knee the size of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the knee, until the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then anoint the softness in oil, and put it in wounds, and I anoint the bandage that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white finger cauterized which we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because it happens often, and let the vein be until it heals by itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it aroused with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old wise men said that it is done in the manner of a snail which goes together with the vision, in such a way that you bind the veins, after shaving lightly around the joints.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cauterize in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who have a swelling, until the veins heal; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and opens the legs; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the intestines, and if you do, it's little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always if it remains too long at this point, the wound or syphilis increases, until the intestine ruptures;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this has happened through the extension of the swollen vein which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the veins and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then touches the sore vein inflamed from the large abscess according to the quantity of two ounces.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extracts the swollen vein that is beneath the skin which is inflamed, then takes the rod and places it on the apparent vein of the swollen vein.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press on the front of the belly, then cut the .ij. joints appearing on the surface of the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch any part of the surface that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulcers of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the veins, if it is mended and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surface is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times are the skins of the thighs softened in some men, because the fats that are within are mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy, and heals the filament.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I know that punishments are established in our law, and therefore I preferred not to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary to discuss them only for .ij. reasons: one is that the masters respond when asked, and heal the wound; and another, because we often need help from punishments of certain beasts, such as goats and sheep and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we make by attraction, we sit the beast in warm water, so that the joint becomes mollified and pendant; then take them with your hand, so that they are reset and you no longer feel them. Of the punishment of tail: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. plug, when you have well explored; and leave no small piece of the subtle vein that is above the vessels; and this method of punishment is more gentle than the one made by attraction, because during attraction something often remains in the thighs, which the beast desires to luxuriate; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Here is the translation:
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation:
de la tentigene	of the tentiginous (Note: Tentiginous likely means "inflamed" or "swollen", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The tentiginous is a swollen mass situated on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tentiginous with your hand or with onions, and apply a light touch; and don't go too deep in the fontanel, lest corrupted blood flows out, then treat another tumor until it's healthy; and at another place that grows on the mouth of the thigh, and the gland, and by chance it falls off, and it's according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said about the tentiginous, and the treatment until it's healthy.
de erratique	of the erratic (Note: Erratique likely means "irregular" or "wayward", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it's natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes from it; or it's because of a mass situated, or a subtle dou syfac, or an espés, and it's made deep in the thigh, or in the side, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flors have to be had; and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the baile. The estoupemens are closely apparent, if you want to understand. If it's a subtle dou syfac, and it's closely .ij. livres, if you hurry, and turn them around: place your .ij. indices together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then stretch out the .ij. livres strongly, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and covers the estoupemens; then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the spot, and guide the woman to do this every day, so that she cannot become pregnant. And if the dou syfac is hard and espés, it's necessary to clean the spatula-like tool resembling a foille de mirte. If the estoupemens are of a new type, suspend them from the oncine and cope; and take medicines that staunch blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incens, assembled with an abundance of egg whites; then apply a large poultice, so that the wound cannot become pregnant; and thus it will be long-lasting, and apply a linen thread to dry it out; then cure other cures until it's healthy. And when there is a new char in the thigh, it's necessary to treat it according to this method, if it's not an aposteme enchancrez. For at an aposteme enchancreit that is in the thigh, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come into the marrow, such as cancer and aposteme pierous and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and aposteme chaut, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak about the hot abscess which comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that swallow bowels; and if you want to know how to work with iron, see if the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it ripen until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he leans, and supports himself on his back and gathers his feet as far as the knee; and so are his thighs spread out, and puts his arms under his knees, and binds them well with a lien thread; then suck the bile from the right side, and I will show you the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you have seen how to handle this instrument, that you fix the rule first in order to know the profundity of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the profundity of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the chief, spatiumile style; and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary that you put tents moistened with oil rose or oil green dry; and put the tent above the wound at the profundity of the marrow, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the knee a nettle moistened in water or malves so are cuites; then cure afterwards for two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is sanez; and no time lift the marrow and the wound by cleaning with water and honey, and then water or roots of lily and aristologe longue so are cuites; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repopened in the marrow, it is necessary that you take care not to cauterize with iron, but cure thus as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes naturally onto his head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtue of it is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or hold her in place; and bring out its natural oil or fenugreek so it is cooked, and then put the bath between her two little spatula-like fingers which are the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and bind the second one, and touch her finger as much as the moisture that is inside is carried out; and press on the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sasamum; then make her take a compress and bind it tightly, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the infant is now outside. And if the hands are carried out forcefully, then you must gently rock them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet high; then remove the stool from the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then place the hands on the counter which is before placed, and extract the child, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the delivery of the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to place it high up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, so it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it heals just as it should, if you instruct to take hold, and make the condyle stretch;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it heals strongly, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not straighten as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not straighten as we have said, take a poultice of high altarage, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush all in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it to the natural shape of the woman's thigh within and remove this joint.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have them sit in a warm bath up to the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened below, have them gird with myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have them sit on a chair, then have them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for it will now be relieved.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hand little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on his neck, and let the feet hang down, and be lying on his back.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then place his hands on the belly, and lift the cushions from underneath, so that it is prepared below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not stir, take his feet and move them gently, then move the belly upwards, then he will put out his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and you anoint the little child little by little; and command the woman to take hold of it as much as the infant wants.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes holding a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to re-engage to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lift and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs forcibly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then treat the muscular disorder that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is not pregnant, make her sit on a chair, then study the alignment of her hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and examine the child according to their natural shape, and make them stretch, and instruct that they take themselves in hand so that the infants are strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should take his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold of it; and make him stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the following
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes forth in this manner to all the following, if you cut the secondary vein at your finger, so that the moisture is emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it falls upon his face and neck, if you cut from the bud, so that it is not retained, and kills the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then throw the infant inside, so that you have placed it as it ought to be, and instruct the woman that she should not take it at any time:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then you must straighten it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the dislocation of the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones) are born many times, and none are born three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if they rarely survive.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, which must be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac that divides them, which is tied to the belly;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue forth naturally like all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle bath be made, and do it thoroughly and lightly as it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it thus as it is worth to move towards health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is fitting that the wise one knows all this, for it seems that they have experienced similar things;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	thus do according to what he knows.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to perform manual extraction.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be inclined downwards, and her thighs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the nurse holds the tender hand of the child, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not hurt during the delivery of the infant;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist olive oil mixed with honey and fern seed and flaxseed, then anoint the fontanelle with these oils and honey;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then gently apply them to the mother's thighs, then want her to hold them in place with a bandage that is suitable for that;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the infant is wrapped so that it descends upon its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you prick the tonsils in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on his feet, prick them or puncture and also the moist places;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the tonsil with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend back all his hand lightly, and prick the tonsil in none of those places that we have said, until it comes to the void thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the tonsil:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then set against another oncin, where the third is placed in your hand, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then hold them evenly, moving from one side to the other, so that they can issue forth, and let the oncin be held firmly, as it is in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, oil the joint with some of its oily fingers, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains no point, place this oncin or higher up, and do it so that they issue forth completely without fail.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return due to stiffness.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so it is necessary that you wrap it in a bandage, as long as it is completely healed.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the cupping on the joint of the sole or at the elbow, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and with the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the infant is large and it is twisted at birth, or if it has an aquiline nose assembled.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and pull out the needle;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you round to the instrument which is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in the same way, I do it for the infants who have a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones as if they were tendons,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if he has a strong neck and holds fast with strength, even if it be broken, as long as the moisture that is or comes out strongly;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces at the joint where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as long as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the inflammation is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the morrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you straighten it with a drape, enveloping it in the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limbs are numb, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if you insert your hand into the fontanel of the marrow, and draw it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then apply a poultice of onion or garlic, and make a gentle treatment.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be worked on.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then one must administer moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and make soft, gentle, and soothing applications.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then amend that which we have said in the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one has no power, if one treats it by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, amend that which we have said in the abscesses that come from the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows out, then it should be placed in a warm restraining bandage, and amend with other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other was stillborn.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came abscesses in his stomach, and they grew so much that they burst open, and he began to have great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed on it a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, because this wind has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman soon felt better, and immediately had a little movement of the bone in her arm.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the hammer to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one weighs the books; and at .ij. turns as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, the horns should be more subtle than the constrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the box be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one and a half palms long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the midst of them the joints should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenons.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two joints, if you see, a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see open the marrow to all the instrument, if you make sit the woman on .i. bed, the feet pendant and the legs covered,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument below between his hips;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have made the tendons equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, so that the bile makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and their similarities are multiplied; and when the masters have appeared to them, so much the more haste is in the work, and the higher the esteem of men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to regain his wing, and then make him stretch out with confidence, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it jump through that, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	Here is the translation:
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or a tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the cloth as long as the vapors come out of the patient's mouth; then make it stop, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary humor is hastening.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not flee, then instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sesame or in a mustard plaster, and then put it in the affected area.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and hold the second one; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the veins do not burst at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw; if it comes out and becomes loose.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the vein is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not in all that we have said, beware that you do not fail in drawing;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with four-drug ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if the pores open and close again, and come forth fiercely; but nevertheless, when they open if bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It is necessary then to use conjoined fumigations for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of fresh parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similarly to a dog, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigations upon the coals, and the tinea until it is exhausted, and recommences another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, then it is stopped up by subtle skillful hands:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Then it is necessary to give the patient a bowl so that he pierces his own hand, and does not let him perceive the spatula with his finger, and makes the bandage so that it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until he is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the veins want to burst in chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And often these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover that sudden stopping: let it be treated, as we have said about the tube of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the fundament are a knot, and larger than those that come from beneath the fundament outward, or in the space of the adjacent parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that knot is ancient, it operates, and encounters moisture or a white or subtle swelling,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and these fistulas are never persistent; and they are known by the fact that they come out or eject or expel air when the patient makes an effort, and sometimes suddenly burst forth with a sound.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating to the foundation, and not piercing through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your indexed finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or silver into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a sharp perturbation or evacuation, nor from wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate deeply; thus you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or close to the urinary tract, then the urine jumps, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived close to the joint of the hip, then the tense vein comes close to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the discovery of pain inward, it is that it is always thus bowed, and there is no medicine that can be suddenly applied by pricking.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through effort, and vanity of foolish remedies that get in the way.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then apply a tent of thread, or of lead if there is torsion, until you know where the thread comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it at the foundation, then it is necessary that you apply your right index finger,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Then sense that the thread has penetrated; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is perforating.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you do not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One cannot completely heal all wounds, but it happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and insert the hot iron into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these hardened crusts are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the tender moist areas with powder, until those crusts are dry, then treat with ointment, soothing and closing the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healthy, it’s good. If he does not have it, another way cannot make him healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not prick exactly to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the holder a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and thrust before the holder, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holder;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the holder will be delivered, and fall; then I will show you those worn-out flesh that seem like a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound is swollen, and it forms a crust between the skin and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauterizes assemble many things: it is to know, the burning of these joined flesh, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen limbs in mud or in a broken box, as long as the blood flows freely, and it makes the burnt flesh open in the mud;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the swollen fingers with a dry poultice made from hard charcoal, and these are the dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the edge of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are not more ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the base, or if you can place tente and cure as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deeply into the marrow, lest you pierce the tendons that hold the foundation, and come to the gestures by the deliberate sense.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bundle, then it is cut from the deep foundation, either by tension or by another appointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I will show you that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is opposite the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the wound is beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is deeply embedded in the margin of the wound, then extract the thread of the affected part, so that you touch your finger or base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more, until the threads consume these flesh that are between them, and heal;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper setting in the depth, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine-like fistula that one makes if it is very narrow at one end and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not on the other part, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bruises are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately stop the blood flow.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and immediately stop or a little yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to stretch out for walking in chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and appear the threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and hold it like a bandage, or you hold it on your finger, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the uncle cannot hold them due to moisture, take them with a strip of cloth, or a ribbon, or a piece of chamelot;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch them to your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the vein of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then cleanse the patient of piercing and bitter clusters by washing what is in the foundation, so that it may issue forth openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients cannot take it, and if the veins are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them to your finger or to the nails, and you cut, then you treat as we have said, until they are healthy, and that they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	Here is the translation:
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and it is very loose; and hold the thread firmly, then pinch the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave them there for correcting the excessive bleeding.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the dressing, a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it heals, and when they will be healed, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the dryness of the veins or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Here is the translation:
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you hold the point of a spatula or on one nail the scab over, which does not allow it to become damp.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as soon as it is dry so as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be dried, then restart the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarified.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it as soon as it is healthy.
dou fremit	you apply heat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formica is a small, swollen appearance that goes against the body, and it eats much in depth;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and often one finds the frost, and it feels just like death from heat, and it comes to all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a small thread of an eagle's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that thread on the heat, so that the circles surround the heat entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to the whole cane as you grasp everything around the arm, and put it in the foreground, and strip the arm of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, because you must hold with your finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the arm, as it is before or in a chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or tin alloy or chain mail; and never make use of these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are at hand.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived within; and has on one side a perforated opening, and on the other a perforated opening.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it be the belly or womb where one puts medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and it be pierced all around with small holes,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and have between each hole a thread of space, then insert into these holes strong thread strongly twisted in X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse; and that's the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or apple juice, or similar thing, then insert it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister's fingers are applied to his joined hands, so that they be completely visible, then the cluster is removed, and the patient lifts his legs to the bench.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to issue, then the bandage as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night entirely, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clusterize him in illness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as much as he be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or abscess, then let the cluster be as subtly applied as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the subtle form of the cluster held steady on the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to the fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Here is the translation:
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound is situated on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is a judgment of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruined and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the vehement aposteme heat: if you make it healthier from the cephalic membrane at once, so that it comes little blood from the wound, and let the health be contrary to the naval part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, a poultice made with hot oil rose soothingly, or with wine stippled.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he arms it moves, if you put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stretching, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered in the bone, and it is deep, and holds no more than a little, if you probe; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, as if they are tested and cooked well, like roasted poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a skin lesion, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off all the putrid flesh, and apply a dressing, then treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it off with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes thus that the arsenic has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take encense in one part; blood of dragon two parts; lively chalk three parts, and subtly grind the powder.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not the encense nor the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the artery has moved away from the wound, meanwhile it is in this state, if you do not put this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it casts off the pus.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the cure, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicines be soothing, as if you warm the water in sweet oil, and mix it with rose oil, and cook the water thus in sweet oil,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other remedies of mine according to this method, and moist applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick there or lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and a stream of blood comes, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is his profession;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spinal cord of the throat is cut, or the knees, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the food goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the knee on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let it rest for some days, then heal the wounds completely so that they are healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so to speak;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are fragments of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and clear away and align the discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment should be as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow of a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, as soon as the patient complains: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not stop the bleeding.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and open the affected part;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment, and bind it with a bandage several times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and have the patient sleep on the wound for two days, or three days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm coming, nor evil trembling of heart nor signs of anguish;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, as long as they are healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if she cannot heal, and operate, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and remove the excess flesh if they are decayed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not decayed, then let the wound rot, if you alleviate the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Here is the translation:
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the ends of the intestines, because of the introversion of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because when we put the intestines back in place, we must not reinsert them from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they retract more to points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it makes the moist wound worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common ruptures have a rupture of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the treatment of other wounds of the body and other proper treatments are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are even more proper with the treatment of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and grievous things are to be reset, it is by one of the aforementioned methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilled, warm it up in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water, then apply it gently,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you burn with a pointed iron and sprinkle and pierce,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and many times they make these constricted veins, and it is murderous that they should be relieved of inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation departing, then anoint the intestine with hot water or warm milk and bad humors are cured,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because it is aligned with the entrance to a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument through which one gathers the blood vessels;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	for we must not cut without great necessity, lest it harm;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the instruments for the splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curve and do not deviate, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you put it back in its natural shape in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	Here is the translation:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and it is in the lower part of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	Place the finger and the foot higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and thus the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you find that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great and minor wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds heal when that which is prepared for you appears.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then they are in your hands, I, a pitiful minister who draws the entire route to his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound, I do not spare, and I fix a needle or it has a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphal,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the main wound from which the abscesses burst forth;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain with a double thread within the needle of the wound, through,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather the heads of the wounds that are about to open,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let it be touched by the space, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then thread the lively file as you did the first needle
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing that, according to what you have mastered of the needles
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those too gross cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for it is necessary that they be ground;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the depth of the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the heads of the veins so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold tight or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for he suffers from a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second wound is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you gather the .ij. heads of skin and the .ij. heads of soft tissue together with a needle or he has a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching follows the bone,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I treated a wound that one had in the belly or abdomen,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a dagger
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's width of great,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was deep into the intestines, well .ij. palms of great,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I bring back the intestine, then it has been 23 hours, for
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure him with ointment, for I stayed in the place where they found none, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a moderate heat on the wound cotton cloth many times a day, and wash with warm honey water as long as it was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and sew up the part that is hurt just up to the place that is inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have sewn up the head of the siphac or cousteit or where you have sewn with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and have them pierce from another part of the inner section just up to the area of defeat;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew as the pelleting maker makes the pellets,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the stitching of one part, and take it up again from another, until the treatment is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of treatment, which Galen says is proper,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is so, like a spring which naturally assembles the disjointed parts
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one head of the wound to the other head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or a pointed instrument into the wound, and make it pierce the swelling beneath,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the disjointed heads of the wound
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through the weakened part just up to the sensitive area within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as it clears the syrupy head;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make them pierce one and the other through the weakened part just up to the sensitive area within, in the other heads of the syrupy gut that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the most common manner of stitching and the most frequent.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galens says this passage, and no one bears witness to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or there will be a thread in each of them;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is the seam more grievous than other places of the belly wound.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of the other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus showing that the artery has moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder of engarrating charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and he arms are swollen, if you put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is festering;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the vein, and be careful with the skin, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to fester badly, much cotton;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and he moves it several times a day so it may be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not have mastery of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperature-calming, or in rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place them between the jaws, and beneath the seat bones;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or rotting in his belly, and many times it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they administer a cluster of black wine enema, and meanwhile the rotting reaches up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine that is called "fasting" cannot heal when it is wounded.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its natural condition.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar heals from the wound, then set it back as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turns towards green or black, then you must read the place that is black, which removes blood that does not come from a vein.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the vein,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the eyes watching from the part below the wound until it befalls to alleviate the extraction when the wounds close, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of a broken bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is inflamed, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and was inflamed and became fistulous, and thus he lost digestion and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put a treatment according to what I could, and did not stop subtling until he was healthy, and the wounds dried up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him dry up, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no trouble, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they direct some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm hold of large thighs, then assemble the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thighs have opened their mouth, then place them on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it stretches its mouth thus;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts off the head, and it holds so well that it cannot disjoint.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another ferment in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	That head if it gets stuck in the intestine, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine thread which should be very loosened,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie it to the head of this thread, that is a subtle twisted flaxen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper route.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching wounds is not fiercer than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, if there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is hairy and produces a lump.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the truth a hard, painful, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear ulceration, and sometimes in thick scabs;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have already spoken about the classification of wounds, that every wound that is not sutured, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not otherwise except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it's knowing, by the small passage of blood or course;
ou por sa malice;	or by his wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow anything to be born of flesh;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the lesion is putrid, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where because the corruption is a type of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come to the great veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or to some joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you will examine it, if you take a thin rod of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if you want it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for they fill themselves with muscles against the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and they form a fistula at the pierced hands and you cannot well examine it by palpations,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you touch it with one of the pierced areas,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one pierced area to another, and it festers;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you recognize by your power whether there is bone or nerve, and it is shaved away in the front.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, if you cut according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove for the putrid matter and the corrupt humors that are within
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment so that it may be healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you should cut through deeply, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply warm compresses in medicinal agua, and the boils just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine corrodes the excess which is remaining at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments on the wounds, so that they may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy by this, then one should cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then one should cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not bother you with principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let it be until the decay is entirely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the affected things in the same way as long as they are healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not able to heal just as they do:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it becomes uncovered and you strive as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	Here is the translation:
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to let Nature do its work;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if it has a small corrupt bone, and you can treat it with bandages,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with an instrument suitable for that,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if it has many bones, so take them out three at a time, do not leave more than one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes you oppose, there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you bind and moisten and heat, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing rotting,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the flesh is rotten among the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then if they have lighter bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you extract so much of the corruption that the blackness is entirely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the rotten corpse, it comes just to the mole of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to sew and cover up to the corruption, and then to treat until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the humors went to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and had no way of relieving himself by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but his mirror showed him foolishly that they were so swollen that the abscesses opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and in corroding much of the matter, and it became fistula, and many perforations occurred that all gathered together in a wound and moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many a mirror mirrored cure within these years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrupts through the pores to a great body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I burned a tent in one of these perforations, and then sought all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption came just up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw those who appeared to me with a corrupt bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I had.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines soothing over a long period, and could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continued corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then had it, and thought of healing the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I do not touch it as much as I grasp around a palm of the bone, and the trait follows to its entire mass,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored the administration of medicines; and it was healthy and sound immediately,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it did not require to restart the work forcefully because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For because of the blood evacuation often, but he was entirely healthy.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard crust formed on the bone, and he was of good disposition and had no hindrance nor contradiction in everything, neither in going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, thus it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take the ligament, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him to stretch up high;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another bandage on the larger vein, and tie it above the flesh which is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the head, if you pull out the corrupt flesh from below,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the limb where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not affect the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and apply a poultice or a tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to clean so much that one can see and feel the corruption, and to clean again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear so, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the entire flesh; then apply a poultice under,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then the putrid matter spreads from one part to another, and it is the putrid discharge of the corruption that pours out, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and pour out the bone or whatever it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joined bones, then there is no other remedy than to cut through.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the grasp of the hand, or in the grasp of the foot, then it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it is necessary that you inquire about this decay, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and the decaying in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make contrary signs to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the veins are for coping with these bones which are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of surgery instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will have need of, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the methods of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument you will have need of, according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head collapses either because of inwardness or because of fury;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you will have applied the medicine to that corrosion through the treatment with medicines, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you must cover that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient is wounded by this of death, or by malice, which is greater, than the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards the blackness spreads, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes over the entire body; if you hasten to cure it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is through the impact of certain venomous beasts, like the sea scorpion and viper and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the chief of two fingers, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it is of no use to apply remedies that are not equal to its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and thus we do when the corrosion comes or hurts: if it comes in the first joint, then it seizes after one joint and another;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or hurts, then it seizes the whole foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it climbs up to the leg, then it seizes at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die of the wound;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to amputate or to saw through the limb is that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister on one of the lower ligaments, and another minister on the other upper ligament,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then apply the cupping or suction, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the suction does not touch the healthy skin.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another wound and abscess ulcer.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the flow of blood comes when you open, then cauterize the skin hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then he should bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I would advise him that he had an injury in his own foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a black spot which seemed to be burnt by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in his toe of the foot, so that it devoured the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the decay returns on the hand, or on the other arm, and it comes to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put them on receptive things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroding;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I covered the hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to recover the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also fear that if he cuts his hand, it will not die
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was feeble; and he became desperate, and returned to his land
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he hastened to amputate his hand, and was cured
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not counted it as one of those things that are done in another way, so that one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess come to a head swollen with charcoal, and it stays so long that it forms a large collection of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and the swollen eyes become dim, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as subtle as the delicate folds of a cloak,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such illness is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but since it is so extended that it reaches just to the bone in front, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so that you cut through the whole circumference, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not appear due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have seen that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cluster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look at the sins are great, and the abscess that is in it is of foul odor,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the clusterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Here is the translation:
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	as long as the medicine is red, and appears as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a thin layer and in honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breast is exhausted, and the pus is evacuated.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then cool, and cleanse, until you know that the breast is well purged.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor powder of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if they are treated with water and honey or have a little bit of litharge broth;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you treat it with honey and mulled wine, which has the property of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have seen that the senses are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you cleanse what makes the flesh grow in them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the pierced skin is small, and the needle of the lancet cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it with a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or ointment basilicon, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it so that the lancet can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if it pierces where the fluid is above, whether it collects or flows down more below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the fluid is in abundance, do not let it be exhausted quickly;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound from below as you have seen,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it appears in such a way that the fluid flows to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	because when the bowel is perforated, one must not let it swell there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	it appears in such a manner: that the bowel collapses lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the seat,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stand on the drapery of linen that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then apply a strong bandage in the correct place around the nipple, a little larger than at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then make a gentle binding on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the nipple of the breast to align the bandage, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the perforated breast, often breaks by breaking the suture.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows that which runs from the suture, whether it is venomous or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the veins are open, and approach the healthy ones;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislodge it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislodge the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if it changes, I change another dressing, and renew the bandaging.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the veins are agitated by indigestion after many days, know that the veins have not been opened.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you come subtle cords afterwards long tension, do not despair of the health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the health approaches. For there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel is indigested, it hurts within a few days after many a day, beware that the senses do not get worse;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the senses take long to clear, and it is prolonged, then administer moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	Here is the translation:
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a treatment of fire cautery, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine in equal substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then boil it down and use it; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when the fire cautery treatment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply a glue-like dressing, and spread it over the breast, and at no time does one minister as an Aristologist for a long time,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial, which is also like flour of vezes and a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is lengthy, and it is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then it is known that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	where you tread, where by chance you are born with other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is swollen, and one does not take care, if an abscess comes to the ankle,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and run and throw so that it runs against the root of the nail, and by chance it runs entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that a foul pain comes, and the head of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	it is necessary that you cut to the finger all the superfluity which remains in the corner,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and he applies the iron to the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blister.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you put the straight edge beneath the iron so it does not touch the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the tip upwards, and subtly and lightly feel the flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining part of the flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds so that they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut around it, and pull hard, for as much as the corrupted bone is, so it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the decayed tooth, cut around it, in the same way as it has been said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment so that it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is bruised, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the corner of the spatula-like instrument, going across above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the cutting does not reach just to the flesh which is beneath the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that overcomes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born on the hands of certain men by chance are completely numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance it has a piece or bone, and never has a nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them is born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in none of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with a bad humor does not move himself,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who is born at the joint of the humor, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of one who is lean is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Here is the translation:
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or owes to the rear navel string, it is necessary that you first take hold of the round flesh up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then take hold of the bone at a convenient socket for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together in this way come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you take hold of the dislocation, so that the bone returns to its natural shape.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two warm tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, as long as the wounds are stuck together, as it is suitable.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you cover that stickiness as it is suitable.
Des vils	Of ulcers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Here is the translation:
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they have more in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is that they are cauterized, and one treats the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open the vein, and treat it thoroughly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	Here is the translation:
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut open the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then let blood flow and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black cole (cabbage) for a while;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of the limb are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein from the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems also like a pale white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then prick beneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pinch at the ankle more lightly,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cut in another place beneath the two fingers; then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then apply the ointment to the reason, as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, as you had previously done;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another incision, or more if you are a master of it, then apply the ointment, and attach it to the two fingers of the foot;
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull and apply the ointment up to the second incision; then extract the incision from incision, until it is completely clean, then attach;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift, if you need to insert a strong double-threaded needle everywhere, fully fortified;
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and the bandage and the binding, and you will make a splint underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, so that it holds in place;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not slip, for if it slips, one cannot draw or lift, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have fully drawn it, place on the surface of the wound a lint soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the veins are constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and they are not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	it is necessary that you bend it straightly, but do not cover it badly; and treat it thus as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that one uses to touch the wound is curved, and does not cut badly, so it does not touch the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the form.
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is injured in the legs, in warm places where there are neither herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it does not grow elsewhere than in the legs, and that comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it grows within the body snakes and worms, injuring between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then he changes his eyes, and begins to open a vein for bleeding, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the nail, and the nostril.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the nail.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, so that it is entirely freed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because you take it, if you return to the flesh, and bring about an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not at all this vein when it is treated with five fingers' length of an inch, or ten;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a hundred steps came to me, at whose hand it issued from ten fingers' length of an inch, and when you take it, if you apply an iron or pierced instrument, and pierce it deeply;
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and many holes come about, and then they often jump; heal them thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the wounds that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small vein which grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and one feels it well at the passage from member to member, as far as the skin or where it goes, and jumps suddenly;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by bad digestion of certain humors, like worms, snakes, and lice that live in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its evil nature, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	perhaps returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it curing and treating, if one cannot do better than when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then it is necessary that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-tightened ligature,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the tail of the vein, and if the verse is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above, as much as it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that he does, if he runs to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cope with it above, and pull it out strong;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is suitable to use the patient's mundification of bodily medicines solving the bad humidors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of wounds becoming putrid from rotting flesh.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more painful than anything, as if alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it corrodes throughout the entire body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it turns again towards the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many times how well they wanted to move pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not aid him willingly, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason it appears that the constriction of the womb is evident;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I do not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and responding veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the limb is positioned above and below hastily, and then stop there until that ventilation constrains the limb in its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment of those who dislocate the ventilation, like foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are those which have large heads, and small ones, and notched, and smooth;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have sharp angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and it falls on a member if it falls in seven ways: whether in a principal member it falls,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	if as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in the head and pierces the bone, and remove the swelling that is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is numbness and heaviness and darkness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a pimple, and it jumps out also like a broken piece of flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you hold on to the treatment, and remove the arrow so it doesn't remain.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls or strikes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves also like a pimple, and in a dark black blood, and brings forth cold sweat and cold faintness.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Here is the translation:
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis it bursts from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold sweat.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow head sticks in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head sticks in the stomach, by chance it bursts from the wound with some undigested food.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head sticks in the belly, and bursts into the intestine through a perforation, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out in a gush, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositional arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's why you should do something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and I pulled from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was suddenly healthy without manipulation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was positioned, and it could not be touched except for the point towards the empty space,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with a whole iron point without an iron ring; the game was healthy, and no evil accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And pull out a vein from the throat to a Christian, and it was an Arabic vein at the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and I subtly pulled out as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I pulled out a vein from a man's body, which was swollen in the belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, and I extracted it, and I made a hole, but there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell or got stuck, and the wound was sewn over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and delays the arrow within him, and does not change its natural arrangements,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And it was seen with another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he lingered thus, suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they removed an arrow from the king's prince's man, which had been shot into his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the case after it had fallen for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a sharp pain and ache beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the patient a plaster of attrative digestive, because the limbs do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I separate the limbs from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster daily, and heal the wound thoroughly, and thus I relieve the patient of long pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow .i. a day within his nose; and it was pointed at me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I apply the cauter to the wounded place with a corrosive medicine by gentle touches, so that it was opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it passed well beyond the terms within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then scarify if the wound is that I touch the tendons, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease from subtilying and engineering in ways of instruments, until I took them for well-made tendons.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to that which its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may heal it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you apply your treatment to those things that I do not mention, for the book cannot take everything in;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well a big thing with what is present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from limbs where they are fixed, except in seven ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the soil where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous all around, and the issue is clear.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce all around with a subtle iron, as much as the eyes all around are enlarged, and then pull.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: if they do not pull it back, but let it be until it is even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for the artery comes just under the skin, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the artery is not fixed where it should be in the bone, and does not come just under the skin,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains some days without bad accident, if the engine of the drawing.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck in this way and cannot issue forth, if you administer tareres around, as I have told you; then cure the joint until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is stuck in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, seek it out thoroughly everywhere;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, extract it with no suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve, if the wound is so great that the pain is severe;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has an arrowhead in the arrow where it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if a bone is stuck with a splinter of wood, remove the part that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrowheads of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you remove it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then remove it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood contradicts you, if you amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and take heed how you can safely remove the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	where you burn or scorch, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, or which reveals nothing of it, or the skin is inflamed in a place if one sees or feels it apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then underneath, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot exit, let it still be, and then recommences the extraction until it exits forcibly;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead is there, thrust it to the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a thrust, then it administers an instrument that breaks;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the point of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrowhead is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with the point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, then you cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your job;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the pointed cautery is also like the feather of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to prick at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pricking and for extracting, that's how it is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 31, because there it has or makes 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and those veins that are in the eyebrows of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the small veins that are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and veins which are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the moyenne is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the pubic area,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that is bled, which appears clearly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left shinbone corner,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shinbone corner; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and you examine the patient's quality, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then the patient tightens their neck to a vision,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two lids depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where you touch with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of anemia;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should make two traversing cuts, and make the blood flow out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold it back and let it go, so that it may be healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to remove old inflammation,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swelling, and accustomed optalmia, and at the course of the tears, which waters the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the health of the patient is so, as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient's neck is strained, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and let the hairs grow underneath your finger, and then sign with an inch;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then raise the curve on the vein above your finger's tip, and put the lancet underneath,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and raise the vein above, and the cope, as you have done with other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then shape the lie, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and their extraction, where the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and lay the vein so it is healthy and no longer swollen from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the vein of the crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the eyes that are in the eyelids help with the eyes, and at the forehead, and at the temples, and at the orbit in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the vein be of two traversing paths, a little long, a little wide, for there is no cartilage.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then let it settle on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The veins of the vein of the nose are worth examining for ague, and for sudden faintness, and for facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as if it is migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the sanity is such that the patient tightens his neck, then tightens his nose with his left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and insert it in the liver at the space which is between the two nostrils;
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the veins do not appear well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep into the wound, and make a correction of the blood according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is nearly fully restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that's the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two gums helps in the stretching of the ligament, and at the beginning of messeliness, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corroding, and in herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is that the patients stretch their necks from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the masters stand over the patient's head, and the patients sit on their seat
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then sound the vein of the loin a little broadly, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then repeat on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in the hole in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and bad nests and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left,
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they know them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	look carefully at one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you examine the largest of each part, and thus you make a distinction between the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	About the health of the tongue below
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healthy one is such that the patient's hand should be held before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath for a vein on each side;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healthy then is one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck where one commonly finds health are healthy in three ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where I prick everything, I flame mirrin large, or olive oil subtle as if I cut trenches, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as if you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it has a master for opening the veins full of thick apparent blood, and which contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the purifier to purge strongly, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not be pricking the flame, but rather cutting similarly.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no vein of it, or you take from its bed the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the head to the flame anesthetize, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and apply the vein to the flame anesthetize;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and be careful not to strike into the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid that then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then lift your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins returns; and the blood stagnates.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scrape of fistic, and make it, and take one of the mallets and lay it just beside the other one;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the wound is staunched, that's good; if not, then cauterize, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stauching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the joint of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The health of the vein in the middle if it helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful lest he cut too far in by the nerve that is underneath, and if he presses too much, he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the sinews are irritated, and perhaps he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any home because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you sound the instrument with skill; and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, which attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bloodlet at the flame olive or at the flame martian, because it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to grievously harm anything if one fails the first time, and then recommences.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, as it happens at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not accomplished except by preserving health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healthy vein be made in one of the four veins that are on the couture: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of taking preventative measures against a wound, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever it is needed, whether by day or by night, at all hours and in every tension;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until September.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines with a lightclyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained feces, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines, which are nuisance to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor he who is drunk, as long as there is fury or dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it is worse for the sick one after passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiple miscarriages in a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and this that takes away all virtue, or by thing of the arm or soft body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then thin out the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have a weak power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, since nothing can dissolve it, to thin out the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you suck out of the vein the worst that is between the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you beware of that day of labor, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than the one who is sucking, and rub the arm three or four times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then extract the thread from above gently, for when it is too stretched out or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the joints with his hands, until the veins swell, and he feels it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then anoint the sinewy parts with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on that vein below the joint a little where he wants to heal;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the veins do not fade and fail to heal.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that feel like cords to the healer, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the joint, so the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps it will come to abscesses or ulcers; do not insert anything, then resume the health as it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then pierce that very opening correctly in the entire flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open a little hastily, so that the eyes may be swollen; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye swollen, do not resume the health, and put a little of the oil of olive on it, for it alleviates the body's bloody flow, and is a remedy in this eye the oil that I mentioned.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same remedy makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one places it on the organ; if subtly the senses are separated and they are apart when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which occurs many times, especially when it is not healthy unless at that time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and place on the organ a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issues from the vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any black or green color, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess appears at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it might happen in court without an artery; but the fact is to make a plaster cast to harden the spot, then treat with another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one makes a larger wound, and the flames are large;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is more suitable to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled in a crosswise manner, not in a piercing way;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of health is free from deterioration of blood and from impairment of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a millet porridge in juice of green apples; if it is heated, so draw out three times or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complexion, so eat before health millet porridge in musky syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicories, and well-odorous syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it fails in health, after the issue of much blood, so it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat, and subtle well-odorous syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and also use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bleeding, and it has hardened strongly, should be bled at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood inside the body which is already heated, and it causes a fever to come; if one must treat a large quantity, and enlarge the pores as much as it bursts into sweat.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you should check all the signs of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not come into the body.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you should not move when you dislocate your arm, and make the blood flow out a second time, and the pores are closed, so that you press strongly upon;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is curved, he stretches out his arm hastily, for it would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him stretch out as long as it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on a small piece of silk in water, and press on lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding is necessary, then open the same vein again, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the bleeding now from across, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the perforations be large, and let them be well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get them out, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this vein is healthier than all other veins, for there is no artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Here is the translation:
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you make a crosswise incision, and if you cut all around, do not cause any grief;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not dig too deeply in the font, for the nerves are underneath, completely bare of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is relieved by warm water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and lay it on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	sound the congealed blood where it is more abundant or larger vein, or at the ankle, which is of greater value.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you sound the congealed blood above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the congealed blood traverses also as in a coping; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, put the foot in warm water, and let the vein open well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the veins are faulty for the first time, restart the second above a little, because the veins are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a soporific of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic vein are at the level of the thigh, and their sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its sinew is that the patient goes between good and bad, and extracts above the thigh, three fingers in twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should examine it in all ways that you can, and by penetrating.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is stagnant, and it is much accumulated in many places at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then no vein opens or gives dew to the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and the tourniquet; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The suctions of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of antler, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and cupping that is done by striking and by extracting blood is done in 13 ways of bodily harm,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because one of them is entirely asleep in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others in the sides of the neck; and the veins below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the veins of the shoulders; and the veins on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the veins in the arms; and the veins of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cupping glasses of the seventh rib; and the cupping does not draw a point of blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this one does not become afraid of it, just as one makes bloodletting of a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any illness that comes from excess, as long as the body is purged.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, if we administer them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in every tension;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they have the task of applying cups, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are some who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the mouse helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this poulticing is in the place of the saliva of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because that causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it does not seem to me that the old men are using it, nor those who have cold heads with bad diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often feel dizzy, they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of obliviousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in place of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for the stretching of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and a bruise, and a replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to puncture, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be obstruction of the bowel or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they hurt in the head, and optalmia and migraine, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the vein of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand to put it, so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings beneath the chin are like a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the veins of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventosations of the seams are worth as much as three good veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these thick veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions, for the flesh is naked of skin, and knows of underlying nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the backside is worth as much as emoroydes of the foundation, and as illnesses underneath, and it is necessary that the ventouse be large, and be of a certain size, so it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Here is the translation:
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize many times: the first time to subtly open up the path of the large blood wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with only one application.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommence often; and if the wound is deep, we cauterize in the background, and the ends are such that the crust forms suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the pores of the oily aperture with apertif and dissolutive oils.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and the similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if it is one who has tender and large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on them.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of warm water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he raises with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick superfluities raise themselves with old wine, or water of elder, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to be more careful of cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary to warn when one must be warned and when it is warned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of the one who is wounded by choleric passions, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and avoids peaches, and meat from a castrated animal, and damp meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mixes a little, and mixes a little peaches and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he feels dizzy, if he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the dizziness, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtly treated, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The blisters that are placed without striking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, for these members cannot suffer a blow from above.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not make it so that blood flows from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put blisters on the stomach and on the bowels to diminish the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it happens when one puts it on the fire and on the soft part when there is retained windiness
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these windinesses are administered voided by sucking too much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of watery tediousness
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in bad illnesses of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or water in which one has cooked herbs convenient for that
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' length and a half palm's width from the fontanelle, and it has or it is next to the milestone, a small perforation, just as if one would prick with a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be of iron, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a held clamp,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the blisters of children are other than those of the old, and of the thin ones rather than the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus put this blister on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or lead, and put it in the blister across the vein that is in the blister,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it on the limb, and let two be on the perforations that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapors go out, and remove the ventouse.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take in the linen cloth as before, and rewrap it often, if you have need of it.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventouse where it is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at every corner, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Here is the translation:
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the dislocations of the flesh, as we said or not, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the usage is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet nodes without bitterness, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a node in a tender sweet spot, until they become familiar, and have nothing in the way;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed of vein and of abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the veins;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and dry, it is the time to apply a cupping glass, if one can put it, for that is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the skin of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the skin is too sensitive afterwards near the body of the veins, so anoint with a cold water compress, and put on, until the vein is constricted;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiple, then apply a powdered glass or gypsum, or similar things, until it is constricted;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you apply on the body many peeled beans, and let them stick as long as they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this kind, take other sapless ones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sapless ones do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sap comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they stick;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, powder on a little of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of cinders, if they will now heal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men who wrote this chapter, did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letters about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this cause is estranged the knowledge in our land, for I never found any good therein;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except that through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these preceding chapters;
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it's known that cold joints are bad, and excessive eating of veal and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat too much of raw vegetables, and do not overfill with meats that fill the veins with blood, so you have no fear of hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their initial good governance which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or it has viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but it is not so, reset the broken bone with thick tendons which are reunited and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and do not touch any part of his work, and therefore he must be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks all along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner it has its engine, and its own instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes back into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joint is twisted, and opens well by force, and sounds at the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breaking;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medications that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which goes in awry, and are the disjointed parts, it is necessary to put them now in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not gather there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if boils appear, they come if he lets them alone for a day, until the boils are softened;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it evenly on the muscles that you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of one where it has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is dislocated in two or three parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small limb, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are dislocated, you reset them by adjusting all the joints in their proper place on the muscles that you can lift, and take care that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come through their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in a state, reprimand the patient well that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so positioned that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	Here is the translation:
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you ensure it is set straight, so that no twisting occurs when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, thus arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle bandages;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to bind with a wide and sturdy bandage, for wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the internal dressing is light, 3 or 4 turns, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above all the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, so the break can slowly move the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the swollen veins of flax or drapetz, so it is all equal, then bind above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put above something that appeases the hot abscess, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then bind above your stitches, and make a poultice of a large cooled canvas, or of wood where they make the cleavers, or of palm fronds, and adjust according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stitch that one puts above the wound be a little thicker and larger than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it is suitable for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it steady on the edges just as you did at the first operation, then tie a thread above, just as on the fracture at the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the more tightly it is held, the less so; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there should be less than two fingers' breadth of space between each edge.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their sound limbs, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to tighten these stars all at once on the broken limbs the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these stars in place until after 5 or 8 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and thus you see the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and in use, and it's the common manner of the plasterer restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plasterer restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in this proportion .x. 3.; mirre and aloe, in this proportion .v. 3.; and alechil .viiij. 3.; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores the broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is suitable for torsion: take myrrh and vismalve, in this proportion .x. 3.; mirre and aloe, in this proportion .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bole .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to restore broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthy peony leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore the broken bone and for reducing the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fine flour, each a part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to restore even stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, things which are a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of applying that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and chamomile decotions, or pellets of bird's foot, and vismallave, and make it even, and crush them, and make an application on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea-sponge, and dip in water, and lift the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, wrapped in water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little of the poultice, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have mastered the poultice and the bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than 8 or 12 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture is corrected, and the adjustment of the flesh is near.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then you restrain more than before, and the swelling grows, as I said earlier; and if you see the limb drying out more than it should be, know that it cannot heal.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply the warm water treatment, every time you dislocate it, and let it be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	by this work, then the healing of the limb is cut short, and it is hastened by what foolish people do, which twists the limb awry: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, I don't see anything else but to let it be and to open it straight away.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone is broken all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and for this reason this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear strikes the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two grand or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a buried percussion, or fissure or break of the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a goat's hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are set as the craftsmen do when they strike on the anvils; thus within the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft and moist bones, like a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and there are all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislocated as if they were; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaking by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into tendons, and by the corrupted flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hair-like [structure] is known by that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black breaking opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaking, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, lest it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an immediate accident, and you expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then you must divide the divided part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing nerve, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or an abscess swells, it is aided by that which it needs, and it is that you fill the hole with dressed oil in a rosed oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the abscess swells are appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to treat the bone from the outside, and it is done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut at the tight stitching beforehand, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another stitching even larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of diverse stitches, some tight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you make a perforation around it, so that you administer moderate blows with a hammer, not too deeply so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have blows for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of blows.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of blows to pierce into the broken bone is that you put a blow on the bone, and turn your fingers so that you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the blow in another place a little afterwards, and do it all around, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the breaks, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you hold as if with pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which remains attached to the bone at all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and more subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains none of the small bones, no empty shells, if they lightly touch on the instruments; then cure the wound with tendons and ligaments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of surgery is what Galen said, which is more wise; and he praised it greatly, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lenticular incision the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut around the entire bone, and be very careful of the membrane that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is loose at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not feel well-being, but feels fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales with a subtle rasping tool which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp before with large rasping tools, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and make it as light as possible so that you do not irritate the wound, then apply above another linen, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme (abscess) has been appeased, then discontinue it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and apply again medicines without causing mortification.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And beware that the wound is not too clean, that you do not leave it open, nor do you assemble a swelling, for when a swelling assembles on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient; for when one places something mortifying on the wound, it becomes necrotic above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if you cannot find a fire that comes from the medicine that one has put on, so that some virtue has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glueing a drizzle, and you put it on the syphac.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal by ways of cures that are suitable, until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one part by the solvent, for they are three bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make force to enwrap or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your small finger or pertusions of the nail, and put equal to this breakage within your finger index, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you put it evenly on top of a straight rod a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, then make another one alike, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then it bursts at the head of the nail, which is tense with threads of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply it on one side, the break is there; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should mollify the tendons in butter, and change every day. It does not seem to me that it is good, but it is necessary that they be mollified with a concoction of egg white and millet powder; then let the tendon, until the bone is strong, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply it on the nose where the tendons of the egg are, and if there is a swollen drapery within, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient among; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you meet cerotate or cotton mollified in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dyacolon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made of flour of six herbs, and powder of incense, mixed with the yolk of an egg, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind it tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then remove as many fragments as possible from there, then sew up the fracture, and treat the injuries that are swollen and painful, and afterwards, apply suitable emplasters and ointments to them;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no deep wound in the nose, then treat it with tinctures, and apply a poultice of plants, until it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound in front, and the break is downwards only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corralling within, if one examines it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the break into place, and hold it with the other hand from the front, and set it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, then it is necessary that you apply extension to the upper part, so much that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put it on the broken jawbone, and put on a double dressing; and put on the dressing a well-made steel staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so disengage it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and apply a poultice there, made from flour of the mill with plenty of egg or meal of sifted [flour], after you have removed the crust; and put a light poultice there, and if the poultices are effective, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or wounds come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that is in the way; if you subtly remove the obstructing fragments with care.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not remain there, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to cauterize the flesh, so that it be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or it has a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending further, then put under the shoulder on the patient a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in place, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and puts the espaulier behind, and pushes the ministers below the shoulder, so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel debris there, it is necessary that you probe inside; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, apply one of the instruments you have; but put the instrument under the fracture, to ward off the blood flow:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it seems a spoon, and it is not a shame, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have two hands, as you see, and let one be large, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come, thus much. It drizzles into rosated oil and in vinegar and in wine, and puts on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without surgery, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of miller's powder and egg whites, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of drapery on the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy limb, and underneath the diseased limb; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligatures are loose, then restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit up on their back, and place a small pillow under the joint, to raise the shoulder high; if you adjust the fracture of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not occur, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Although the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, it is not set in its place except by touch; if you adjust it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on top a powder made from mill flour with enough egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double-layered cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not evenly placed on the shoulder, adjust it so that it is even; and then tie it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the dressing every day; and all the times it becomes loose, adjust it, and put the strap back in its place, and guide the patient onto their side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be sure, for it is not right to set it free too quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and not below the heart, if it befalls thus, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is not always broken in the middle, but it happens little; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and twists, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well therein.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient places himself thus on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the broken bones with your hands, and subtly put them in order in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes dislocated, then restrain it; and if you see it becoming loose, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes from the wetness, or pain or abscess, hurry, and take away the dressing, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it firmly until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breakage of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur unless in the large ones behind the back, and at the inner part of the head, and they do not feel it unless because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the interrogation of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restorations are that you make equal the breakage, as it is suitable. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery over it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breakage of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just like a pierced lung, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it produces spotty ulcers, and all sorts of plant-like growths of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to cure the rupture by filling the void.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, for hot abscesses will not come, if it has not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that no one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the matter, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the excess humors from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one must cover the limb of a injured thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the air inside, then one is cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the hole that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the blood; and then one must cut through the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place warm dressings soaked in rose oil on them, and put them on the limb; and treat thus the limb of those who need to cure an abscess, and apply soft poultices on the rib where it is necessary, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also it has a swelling on the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of it, you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel it. Know that it is mortally in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them tight and firm, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, so one must apply treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of it, their feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is loss of sensation and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, it is an involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit down, they cannot. Know that it is mortally ill: do not labor in vain in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayeu's water, as much as it may be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind with a string, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, it must be covered on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so it is large, at a costure, then the treatment of ointment by making a dressing, as long as it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your power, then apply the emplastrum and stel on top, if you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it straight, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the hip is broken, and if it breaks, then there is a small amount of diminution at the head; and make a long bandage, and apply it to the paralyzed parts, and come to the patient's pain in the loin, and puncture, and inflame what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand on top, as long as you are above the fracture; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then place equally on that break, so that it may be in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, put a splint on it, then put it in a wooden or wax mold, and hold the fracture steady so it does not move; and apply the remedy under the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it steady as it is fitting, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full flat plate of moderate thickness, in this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the two shoulders thus, and bend them upwards, and sit the patient on his seat; then he throws his broken arm on the plate, until it comes to the joint, and has in the middle a curve of wood, then bends over something heavy or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors with the fracture evenly in their hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haughtiness, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold steady. And on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put steady the vein beneath the joint, and another towards the neck, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put steady the vein lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the neck; then set the breakage evenly, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not restrain it less than eight days, and put a soft cloth in oil and rose water, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold it steady, and the manner of holding it steady is to place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the dressing, and hold steady at the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, and nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter, stronger and less aloof.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the bond, lest it does not swell with life coming into the place, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you dress, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is beneath, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large foscile, then you must extend it more strongly; and set it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed thus, and the cushion before him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers like an arm to the part beneath his hand, or to the string, and another minister to the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage it falls to pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarrangement that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage it is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, apply a dressing; make a wrapping of soft cloth treated with oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and apply the wrapping subtly, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the wax, and put on an emplaster of powder from the mill with abundant egg whites, afterwards put on the splints, and let the splint of the breakage be a bit stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have five or six splints or arms in different positions: whether the breakage is in one of the bones, or in...; and hold more firmly onto the breakage than other parts, and tighten less often, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as it happens to the limb, then it is necessary that you warm the limb with hot water, so that the irritation is appeased; and let the limb not be constricted or reposed. And then resume the binding, and if the bandages are loosened and the bones disarranged, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a warm poultice that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some hours, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or meanwhile, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and he warms up with movement and stretching, and sleeps on his back; and knows that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the minister's broken bones, and sets them equal with the mirrors, until they are well joined; and he applies the plaster and the poultices, so that apostemes do not come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the blood; and it is enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the middle of the hand near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken palm; and then strap it with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft, smooth skin, as big as the palm of the hand, and strap it, so that it is as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the fluid between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it equal, as necessary; and strap it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in another finger, like the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them together, holding firmly, or you put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot apostemes, and avoid what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face, then each minister extends his bandage equally on his part; and it is when the breakage is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bandages goes towards the thigh, and the other below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bandage is placed below the knee, and the extension is downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that apostemes do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is done in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you bandage the fracture thus: wrap doubly around .i. with a double-layered bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the excess, then bend the leg so the ankle reaches the root of the nail, and insert .i. long thread between the thigh and the leg, from beneath the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then wind around the leg and the thigh the double-layered bandage, then place these bandages on the fracture, and put a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten evenly, then start to bind strongly .iij. turns or .iiij. around the fracture; and when you go further up from the fracture, it tightens less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and unlace .iij. staples that are above, then return beneath to the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the binding, if it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, so there comes neither abscess nor inflammation or similar things.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then undo it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are grasping, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new arrangement; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the hip is broken in this way when you put it back, just as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made in this way, it does not close for the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the hip is restored at the joint, either less or more, according to the diversity of the complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You should know that in the gutter of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits apart. And if it breaks, then it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts equal what is rounded to its two, so it is assembled as much as one can; then put the plaster, and I put a round stick, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is necessary, then reorder all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar things; if one puts for each accident what is fitting, so it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "straight" and the other "oblique"; and there is a fracture just as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones are broken, they turn beforehand.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, they feel great pain, and it is seen clearly; and it turns inward. Then administer an extension, and set it evenly, and align the edges evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers two wooden splints along the length of the leg, which are of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast around the break where there is a wound; and remove each day the dressing to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the hip, there does not come a point of breakage, but at the double bone sometimes comes breakage and at the two little bones, and it is not necessary to have a fracture in more than one disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that you have two broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are elevated; then press them together so they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at the plain joint, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the small table, far from the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the womb is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large amount inside; then remove the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the womb, and restore the bone with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus do for seven days or eight: if the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birthwort, and tie a string around the perineum, and pour all the bladder into the womb; then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the womb will restore the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it be healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the finger of the man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it, and reads my book. For the break signifies more dispositions for the right way of restoration: then give it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the rod, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it in the rod; then wrap drapels around it, and leave it seven days or eight, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set in place now, so that the healthy ones that we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and the treatment with vitriol fails, and you have no other remedy, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come from it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come from it, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not available to put in your hands, then take hold of this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror to grasp 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so it does not slip at the compression on the limb during your work, and let it be straight in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the chief; and the bolt is fixed once, so it holds, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you shape the head of the bone, so the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, or incisor or saw, at your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone of asperties and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural place. Do so much that it's in its place, then anoint with a black stippled wine, and properly, if it's in this state; and don't put anything on the raw wound or anything else where oil is, lest it brings about putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you've restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take great care that the wound isn't constricted with the breakage; and many times have fools made this mistake, and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient many times; and may the strapping be more gentle and softer than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then don't put anything on it; but envelop it around, in the place of these, with hard bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, whether in a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, then remove what you've put on everything, and apply ointment healing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lighter course.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens many times, and it cannot be joined back but returns to the bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tenderness, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes to the bone, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to a multitude of medications; or due to too great movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and give him a warm bath, and give him joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the frequent flow of water soothes, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And often the node is removed by continuously and gently rubbing with damp hands. And let there be gentle movement in the limb at every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted parts are inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, if it is convenient to cut just up to the bone, in subtle incision lightly; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For because delay, if one inflames the joints, and by chance if it is reset to its place; for that reason it must not be moved at the hour when it is inflamed: many times it brings on spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Always, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then leave him, until the aposteme's heat is appeased; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the main joints up to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better position through several manipulations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner that the ministers touch the patient's head, and insert their fingers as if from one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers should be opposite, to put them even; and instruct the patient to relax, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place them evenly, until they regain their proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they arise from warm water and oil, until they are lightly reset; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you place a moist cloth made of oil rosat and wax on it, then tie it lightly with soft threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient should sleep on his back, and his arms be steady between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor make an effort of moving, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and severe pains come, and perhaps a disturbance of the stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of peril; and many times the one who has had it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the side where it is continued and from the foot, and it is dislodged many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislodge; if not, and if it does dislodge many times, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is returned to the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the bone above; and the second is at the part of the foot below; and sometimes it dislocates at the top, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downward towards the bone, especially in those who have little flesh, because in those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes inflamed; in those who have sufficient flesh, it becomes inflamed slowly, and returns to its place slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believe it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla, touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation does not force to be reset, when it is new, or the patient's fever is bad.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then put their fingers underneath the axilla, and lift the joint strongly above at the place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then put it underneath; if it will come back quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come back as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arrange for a softening and soothing treatment, such as a decoction of alder, fenugrec, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then be careful with the patient on their back, and place under the axilla a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors by their heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the good hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is necessary that you make a helper present, who is stronger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the axilla of the patient, and lift the axilla high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister treats the good hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And one resets it in another way: and it is that one fixes a long pin in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is reset just like a pistol, and not too big nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed under the patient, but that they have soft drapery spread underneath, and the patient should be standing far from a long beam; then their hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a pin of two cubits in length and three fingers wide, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the bone, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place it on the head of the beam with soft drapery underneath, so that the beam does not hurt the patient, then put it under the bone of the patient; and extend one arm on the beam of the length, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a large chair, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain there.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is weakened by moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer three cauterizations to it, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold together, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be in its proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on movement, if the patient often bathes, as long as that numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the injured joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that the abscesses which come to life, for if the abscesses come, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from all sides, especially when it is behind; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count inwards, from above and below, and bend the joint to its knuckles together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, if it oils with any oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint firmly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, set a dry poultice with egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some hours, then disband it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, disband the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start the poultice and bandage again, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set; then disband it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels grievous after the replacement of the joint, and it moves, soak it well and rub gently, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the grease on it again, and then enter into a bath; and thus do three or four times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its natural disposition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same manner that it dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedies are that you place the injured hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them equally, so that you place your palm over the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in its place; then put the injured palm of his hand on a table at extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand with their palm on the table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain the swelling abscesses gently, and let them begin to soften again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further than when the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to strain by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go immediately, then release it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated in any part, never on the back of the palm or on the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they stop, and push the dislocation into your pouches as far as it returns, then support the top of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be still for a while, and then make it even with that day; and bind the lie, as we have said, and loosen the day, and make it move, and rebind the lie; and do this often, until it is straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same thing, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot hold it, and often some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you rewind where the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no point of healing or salvation from the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by grand words, where it is not in all great profit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the worst before, no one is healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and thus that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure those unless it is properly treated which comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on a level bed, and have support from beneath him, so he does not slump.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place a thick pillow under the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a bandage beneath the patient's joints, and another at the calves, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two attendants should bind the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the thick pillows.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well fastened, the pillow as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a tube of three inches long, and shave the skin around the area, and the patient should be in a comfortable position, and put the head of the tube under the skin, then place the middle of the tube on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirrors to his feet on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it in the turntable that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix three stitches at the head of the patient's arm of great size, and towards the feet three others, and between each stitch, above and below, a space of one inch;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each stitch one perforation, where the turntable runs, and let the stitches be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three stitches have one turning stitch, where the rope turns, and have in two turntables two small stitches of one inch, to turn the turntable;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament that is among the bones at the turning of the body towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning to all the ligaments, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, set on the emplaustre a decimating plaster with a lot of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the stelae of a .iij. two-inch long tablet, which grips the body of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient to be healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything happens at the end of the health, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stelae that we mentioned before; and never administer it in a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come in the back of the spine below the ribs, and beware that it may be dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one must not have presumptions: for fear of death may come suddenly.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place through dislocations, not as if like other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parties: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward than outward, and slightly dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more the sick knee than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend its knee towards the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who is approaching death are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who is approaching beforehand, it is that he stands well on his leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, it cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is going backwards, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of three manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If it is not so, then one must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pectoral region, then it is necessary to place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip that is diseased, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the four feet of the diseased limb together with a strong and soft bandage above the four heels, and above the four knees, so that the diseased leg is extended four fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be hung from the head of a beam, and be two inches above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and be another minister hanging with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in default, thus guide the patient, as we have said about the one who has gout, and stretch .i. the bandage properly on the affected leg, and on the foot also;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips of the patient in the correct form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and place moist bandages around, so that they do not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirrors to reflect the image onto the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb down, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the .ij. hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and hold with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and it rests for two or three days, then dislocate, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and leave it for two days; then dislocate, and make it comfortable enough so that the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, and forward, and backward; and not at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if he does not adhere to the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the .ij. costs of the knee forcibly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he adheres well his leg to his thigh lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly .iij. hours or three., then unbind it; and do not trouble the patient anymore, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the shin is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	We remind you it is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly numb.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and hold it in place; ministers force by the leg, above the knee.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left; do this several times, then hold it high up, and nicely push the foot high up;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this several times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back into place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will go back into place.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if he cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the affected limb firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the blankets around, so the patient does not twitch.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then stretch the ministres to the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot to his hands or to the lien, so that it is on the hollow of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each minister equally, and the straps be thus between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another minister stretches the healthy leg downwards, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, set the plaster and poultices above, and hold firmly in place, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so that they do not become too constricted.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligaments are numb, hold them in place; then loosen them on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient to move about for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, you must touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the fingers or toes, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is aligned, and there is no gap, put under the sole of the foot a table at the knee, then strain firmly, and let it be for two hours, then dislocate it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply at the beginning of things appeasing hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if you now reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses dry up and come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, if you administer soothing things to dry up the abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccated ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and you gently reset the bone, then set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation:
