O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine together with its filling, and have finished it according to his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from all things, so the science has perished and been dismembered, and there remains nothing but small descriptions in old books that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall vivify it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments for cauterizing and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for him who sets himself to it to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms, connections, and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and ligaments and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the veins and muscles, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore, as Hippocrates says, the name with the name is much, and with the work it is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, must beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often warned many of those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat it, and saw the patient's condition and the greatness of the stone, and knew well that if it was not taken out he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who undertook to treat a duke of our land who had his leg broken and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant physician forced the break over the wound as far as he could, and did not leave any flesh intact, and left it in this state for so long that the leg became all inflamed and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another physician who opened a gangrenous abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his treatment.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem right to touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Por quoi il est besoig que vous vous en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vous Si prenez vos armes en consénsion, et entreprenez vos maux légèrement et fermement, et usez de la meilleure voie si que par la grâce de Dieu vous veniez à salut et soiiez loüés; et laissez les maux espérables de grief santé; et ostez vos armes de ce que vos fait douter, et ayez foi en vous si que vous puissiez venir de cet monde à l’autre de gloire.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galéns says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterizing, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized and has the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and has the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about it and agreed with it; and I find their words too short for my purpose, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot temperament with matter and dry temperament with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions with matter, some have divided and said that cauterization is great aid; while others have said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and says he who says the opposite that cauterization makes great aid in hot and dry disease that comes to men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true some times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And besides, do not meddle in matters that concern only those who have tried it and know through long experience the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and expectations of time; as for other temperaments, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is assembled together with the secrets of cures, and more great goodness than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it be its own.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines come from one member to another, bringing great harm to the diseased person; and by chance kill the patient. The fire, due to its height and goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this in experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it stands on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take away the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; so receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the impending harm is mitigated by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait for a later time when greater evil may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they suppose, because cauterizations are nothing but a medicine that changes the complexion, dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more valuable than other medicines in its haste and virtue of its work and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a possible thing is that the disease comes to be according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and there are superfluities assembled in it through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time or place where there is excess moisture, as with cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is because when we administer methods of treatment for some disease and they are not effective, then we administer cauterization, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears well that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more effective than those with iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the place of cauterization does not make corruption, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are more valuable than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it has been heated by the color of the gold, and it soon becomes cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use fire cauterization because we have made it appear suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, because the way may be more light for you to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways in which we do this because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of dreams and pain of denseness and pain of the throat, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by a soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habituation of the patient can tolerate; and then make the patient's head cold.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the same weight; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let the blood flow from there until it is burned with the cautery called "olivare", which is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand little by little in twisting; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see bone 1/4 inch thick; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take a small piece of silk, and put it in a soft and wet cotton cloth, and place it on the spot, and let it stay for three days; then put on a moistened linen bandage in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, the more it purges itself; and therefore it is more helpful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take away what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should cauterize so much on top, and push it so hard that the bone is reduced to as wide as a finger's width that women put in their purses for this reason, so that the humors may flow out; and one must leave the wound open long enough; after that, one must cure and suture.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except for some people who have a way with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the key is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other members; and indeed when the patient's key is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and purging for me, and from this use I work towards a gathering of health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use yarrow and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head with oils and plasters; and if one does the fire cauterization that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the head of the patient is of a hot nature and not too cold; then cauterize it beneath that cauterization that we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cauterization on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we mentioned before, and make one cauterization in the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and hold your hand so that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations on the horns be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and that is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the head is cleansed by common medicines, and all the other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been tried, and none of it profits: then he should make cauterizations according to two ways, that is to say, by medicinal fire and by burning.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal fire cauterization is when you take a dose of althea, remove the bark and pound it into one part as two horns, then make an incision in the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the dose of althea under the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it well and strain it for 12 hours; then release it and treat the wound so that it is open for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice in butter until purification occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this applies to some of the burning medicines that I have written about or in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery until it has taken its shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or clover with one part of corbeure, and it appears to have a small opening; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the espace of the key is burned; then lift your hand when the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton in awe of silk, and place it on the spot for 3 days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterization called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we mentioned before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously discussed for medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cauterization called "cultellare" until it turns white; and afterwards place it on the aching spot a line and a half long, and hold your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and come right up to the bone; and beware of the jaw when eating, and the nerves have no regard except for the mute one, and spasm does not come to the patient; and beware of the blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or if it has great fear and especially for him who does not know how to do it and is not a student or experienced in this matter; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we mentioned before, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cauterization that we mentioned or the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the previous one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear due to coldness and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizer called "poins" as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, puncture all around the diseased ear, or around both ears if the pain holds in both, and move away a little from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to prick; and make 10 punctures around each ear; afterwards, cure the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is only one of those that move from phlegm, as we mentioned in the divisions of disease; and do not make any cauterizations on similar things that come from scorched skin and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from phlegm and from cleansing of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the cauterizer on the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization near the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a thumb; and leave the cauterization until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is similar to the "cultellare" that we mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after that, cure the wound as I mentioned before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we mentioned before, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then do three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vasselz" as we mentioned before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be cured as we mentioned before.
de litargie	Lepers suffer from a condition known as ergotism
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	To this disease it is necessary to give the patient great year's and pills of molybdenous brain; afterwards, raise the chief part of the patient all, and place a plaster of mustard on the back of the head, as written in the treatise of plasters; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, well it is; and if not, make him three cauterizations around the head descending to the neck, with two inches of space between each cauterization; and cure him as the others, and if you see anything swelling, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and that cautery which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the soreness is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is healed, and that cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use a cautery in cases of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meats; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or moists are corrupted and become thick phlegm, then cauterize as we have said to someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then make him drink something through which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient; after make one turban of linen well made, like a circle, and put it on his head; and the patient should be crossed, and held tightly from all sides; afterwards, present the liniment, and moisten with butter of ancient burdock; and heat it temperately so that the thread can be inserted without causing him to suffer; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for another good governance, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize him while making several points on the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain sufficiently; and then puts a wet cotton cloth on, covered with butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs I said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink something cleansing the head, and ward off all moists, and make him sweat or take a bath several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instruct him to lift his head back, and make a cauterization in the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or to one eye; and close all the veins and arteries that are below the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as well as you can with your skill.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision how to stop it; and never make a cauterization or cut under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the heart of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of awe descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or cuts under the two bones behind; and if there is more need, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow with each small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the heart of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then make the patient drink three cooked cockroaches; afterwards, raise the head, and make a cauterization in the middle of the olivary cautery; and make two cauterizations on each eyebrow, one a little below the hairline; and take care not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this iron which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	until it has taken its shape.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted downward and prick the eye, and then one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the cauterization by fire commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and equal; and if they prick him at their growth, then bind his eyes so that they do not move until they are grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; afterwards mark on paper the shape of the eyes, like the curve of the myrtle leaf, and make the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put damp cotton wool soaked in egg yolk and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked out little by little many times, until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put damp cotton wool into butter until the blister is gone; afterwards treat with oil until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then start again with the cautery on that same spot, just as you did at first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs against the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a form on parchment like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one third, and mix them well together, but hurry so it does not cool down, then put it on the shape you have made, like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then work on that one, and if in both, then do it to both; and put damp cotton wool under the eye in egg yolk; and the patient's head should be in a warm bath and you show your two fingers above the medicine, and press little by little every time the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for they feel burning as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this long enough, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, then lift up the lid of the eye, and if you see the parchment lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then set the medicine again on the place or where the medicine has no work, until your works are equal and your eyes are in order; then put a damp cloth in butter so that the burnt areas are covered, after curing the place of the anointing which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must, then beware well of your work by great care lest the medicine harm your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start the medicine again on that place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after curing it so that it is healed; and this is the form of the "fleum" of myrtle.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this they should be constrained; and it is not fitting for the right way to be shown to one who does not have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The translation of the title is "On the Treatment of Fistula by Cautery".
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in your lap; and hold the men's servant's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or leave its head; afterwards put damp cotton wool soaked in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it is shaved to the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the quill being the cautery; if you see, then it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, then it should be like a tent; but however, what is shaved is worth the movement for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then operate, and extract from behind; afterwards put hot cauterization on top, and hold your hand to the cauterization at the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hands do not act foolishly; and put the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start at the beginning of the cautery right up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and if necessary, let it be for three days; afterwards, put on a moist cotton poultice in butter, and apply the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow as written in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of doing a cautery of a fistula that none of the ancient ones said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	You understand a fistula, and cut into it; afterwards put in the incision one subtle cayenne pepper of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it to the quantity of one third of a pint; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the melted wax runs onto their eye; and it is necessary to put damp cotton wool in egg yolks or aloe on the patient's eye: the wax soaks into the fistula, and heals by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the navel, and bring the fistula back to its natural place in the navel according to what is proper for that place.
des crevaices en levres	The translation of the title is "On Cracks in Lips".
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Very often there occur cracks on lips called "pilous", and even on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it in those cracks as quickly as possible until it comes to a point; afterwards treat the area with cerote oil until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	The translation of the title is "On the Abscess of the Throat".
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and after it has become purulent and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards block or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot and comes to the point of the abscess, and then make it so once or twice; afterwards treat as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	Movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in your hand; afterwards, apply the cautery where the form will come next in this manner as if you put a rope around the tooth; and put hot caustics inside the cautery quickly, and hold for so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay an hour and have a rich fever.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of teeth comes from coldness, whether it is true or apparent, and medical treatments do not work, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The butter cautery is such that you take whale fat and the end of a iron or clay spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it on the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do it often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the painful tooth, and put a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d'arain, and soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, and le met sus le dent and tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l'endemain.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the preparation of this fire cautery, and then let it run forth; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do a cauterization of whatever kind you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the cord:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, then apply the fire cautery with this form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue into the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as often as needed, until it comes to the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and then wrap in moistened cotton soaked in butter until the soreness is removed; after that cure with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures prevail over the channels of the womb, and even when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; afterwards, make a fire cauterization at the root of the throat, but do not come too close to the throat, and burn only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and be it the cauterization that is called "clavicle", which we have shown form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the throat.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the humoral temperament is of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then do two cauterizations on the navel in the lap; and another cauterization inside the chest between the breasts; and this is the "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization in piercing at the entire "point" which is called "points", of which the form is shown before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the cure, let the limb be according to what is said before, and be the fire cauterization at 3 inches according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	See my previous translation:
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side; after lift the key which is inside the title with your left hand's finger; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly, then heat the cautery which has two iron rods, as this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the key until it is pierced all the way to the side, and the figure of the cautery comes together with three cauteries; and for this reason it is done with the cautery that has three rods, because the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three rods:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is applied on top of one of these nerves, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After that, put on the cautery some powdered gall with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move his members for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little harm occurs then, make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized nail, or many cauterizations in puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is refastened, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach and drive it to its complexion, and many cathartics are multiplied in him, and the usual ways of cures do not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make 3 cauterizations below the rib cage of the breast for the quantity of a thumb, all along the cauterized nail, and 2 cauterizations on each side as far as the figures of the cauterizations are at 3 angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they give pain; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate the 2 parts of the bone, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see someone being cauterized with a great fire cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, let him be cauterized while pointing and sealing on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see of incision; then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windy-ness, as long as it is very much out of its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, so the patient should be stirred up on his bed-side; and sign for incision three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the ribs, where the flank of a man comes; and let there be space between each cautery the size of an egg; and let the cauteries be made long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand at all the cautery; and let it burn only as much as the middle of the skin, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then have him sit, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms; and that is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	Et if thy will is, then cauterize these cauteries with the cutellary, if thou art subtle and wise in the art, and take heed that thou dost not burn all the way through, for thou wouldst dry out the entire body; and let it come just short of burning, for the veins are very subtle thereabout, and thou knowest indeed.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the liver's flesh or in its membrane: if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels pain not too intense; and if it is in the membrane, then he feels excessive pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when the cure was being made by mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his head; and then sign above the location where the abscess is, and then apply the cautery which is similar to a bean, from which comes the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautery until the coals are burned, and come just to a spark, until the puncture is all clear; after the cure according to the cure of fevers, until it is healthy; and it is not necessary that anyone other than he who has studied medicine for a long time uses this cautery, by whose hands these diseases have been cured sometimes.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can be done boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy one should make cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as big and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the breastbone and the neck, and two small cauteries somewhat downward in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two by the ribs of the chest after the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather do it openly just as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And certain old people say that one should use a fire cautery resembling the razor, and heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and fever leaves pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then I add three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After placing the two inflamed nerves so that the keys are perceived from the other side, and then treat the fire cauterization, and thus there will be four; if you see, so cauterize all the cauterization to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has taken place over long time, and this is true for the other cures previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cauterization does not benefit the dropsical, except by the method which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breastbone; and let the cauterizations be well close to the space of the key.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery remain open to generate healing for a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown before as a clavicle; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish dew, it is necessary that you apply a cauter to the back of the foot between the thumb and index finger; and lift your hand with the cauter so as not to turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in, lest the yellowish dew bursts forth, and shape the cauter according to this form.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little finger; and let the cauteries be long, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, until the yellowish water is released; after that, cure with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the uterine solution comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are relaxed, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering strongly and having great virtue, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before or the stomach cautery, at the circulatory cautery; and three subtlety cauteries around the belly, each as fine as a clavicle, and two cauteres on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the thumb, and one cautery on each kneecap, and two small cauteres on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemroids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and consist of large, cold, moist, corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then apply cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that part which is entirely beneath the almace date and little by little triangle-shaped, and one under the jaw, two fingers' breadth; and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the food is not cooked, and his face swells, then on his face apply a great cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the navel to all the cauterization of nail length; and let the cauter stay long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure let the limb be so long as it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fatness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut to the fatness which is called "thelul", if you scrape off the cautery that appears as a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that fatness being cut; and leave your hand so long until the cauterizers come out at the birth of the vein, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much fatness, then cauterize each one just as we have said; after curing with ointments for as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize a great cautery on the navel, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an uncured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to anyone, and it is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupted moisture, then you must test all the tent's subtlety, and know how deep it goes in the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After apply the cautery which seems to be rough, and plug it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and repeat the cautery until the putrid and corrupted flesh is burned away, once or twice or three times, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerve that are nearby, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the bladder and into the intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make fires except in a charred place, and think it is not perilous; after cure let the limb be so long as it is sound, and if the flesh is seared, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the flesh is healed entirely; and if the matters are not removed, know that the flesh is torn, and corrupted bone at its root; and thus as one of those things which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from excessive moisture, and does not take shape like a woman's, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the cautery clavicle which we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizers in a line, and they will cause greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part behind the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery be as long as a thumb's breadth; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need them; and the cauterizers be clavicle-shaped according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not leave a means for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizers around the mouth, as we said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizers behind the back; and be the cauterizers clavicle-shaped, as we said.
de la hainche	of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the groin of the haunch, and because of this, it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the wound of departure is found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the haunch with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the wound around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and let the cauterizers be such as those which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizers are not present, make three large cauterizers of the olivaire, and let them be as deep as all the colors; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin of the haunch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured with what we have said in the division and the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors by fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the boil of the groin three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good profundity and greatness, and have between each cautery the breadth of a thumb, and be the cauteries olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle above the head of the groin, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that it should be cauterized at the cautery of the circle which we said before in the dislocation of the haunch; but make it in this manner so that the circle contains all the haunch and all the spaces of the color are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the groin and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, make two cauteries on each side where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four thumbs apart, slightly to the left; and be the cauteries knife-shaped, and let the depth of the burn be that of a key; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the toes or almost there, make three or four cauteries at the point where they feel the pain, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make more; and if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizers that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had a fire treatment on the ankle of the foot, and let it be until the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet as well, and were pierced and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, do a fire treatment on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say in the cauterization of the groin, why is it like this, make such an iron and let it be as big as a walnut of dactyl, or about one less, and be between the interstices and be from one interstice to another the length of a pod of peas; and the interstices are divided into two parts, and they are also like hazelnuts, and there is a good iron made; and that is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be scalded until it is entirely red and gives off sweet smells, and then put on the boil of the sick person's backside, and be turned over on the healthy side; and have one fire cauterization repeated and leave it three days; and then make a poultice with butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure by anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use a little of this cauterization due to the fear of its gaze, and if we see none who use it; and yet these are good cauterizations, which can be borne by those where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burning is such that you make an instrument with interlocking parts where the edges of the door descend, and it be made of earth or iron to a length of one pace, and in the upper part have two nozzles, and between each one have the quantity of the thickness of a dove; and they be over and under, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the bed of hay under the patient lying on their chest, and after that lift your hand above the bed of hay; then pour between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over a fire one pot, and let it leave for an hour or a tenth, and allow the patient to feel the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds a burning or biting sensation like fire; and when the biting is past, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the warm hay bed, and let it be thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from scarring is removed; and let it rest for three days before applying ointment again as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the hip or leg, make the instrument that holds it according to what you have done in the groin similarly; and this is the manner of warm poultice, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and hot sulfur, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new vessel.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening for it to drain so that the point of a razor can go in; and put this pot into another well-filled one, and place sweet dew on top of the alkaline and sulfur, until you have two layers of powder above what you will take with your hand; and leave it thus until the aqueous humor and bile descend into the lower pot, then take all that awe and pour it onto sulfur and alkaline just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very painful and administered in the movements of medical work and other cauterizations of limbs. For it does a good deed like fire, and if to other medicines that one cauterizes well the skin so as to use them thus, with honey, anacardium, and chalces with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a cure of which one man was cured of the pain in his skin and sciatic vein, and greatly praised it, saying that no other cure was done, and he became healthy at one time when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as it teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in the same manner that you take green and dry lapis lazuli, and grind it much with a little bit of grease, and put it on the skin, and on the thigh, and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours or until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warm, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fire, it helps a lot; and one must make the cauteries in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the thumb of the foot and the other one which is called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take goat's hair which is dry, and put it on the fire until it is charred, and place it on the linen, and let it stay until it cools; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you think by reason that it will reach as far as the hankle, and that the pain will cease; and this manner of cautery is called "goat's hair fire".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive evacuation or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary afterwards that the patient be freed from fetid pills or similar things, and one makes signs on the back where the pain stays, three lines marked with an "enche", and in each line five or more cauterizations depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and make the cauterization according to the cauterization called "poins"; and if you see, do three or four cauterizations at the cauterizing point middle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight, thin skin when they rise, and fear; and you will find in the last vertebra of the back and on our appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you know how to cure it, then cauterize at the cauterizing point of that according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery penetrates each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine at the fire that pricks 2 lines or 3, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the wound is healed as we have said, and be careful that you do not administer a cautery in a swollen place which is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moistors that are spread out in each member of the body, and when pain comes into feet, which physicians properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make the cautery all around as one says "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and at other joints, and this often happens, then make a cautery on each knee 3 or 4 times for each part, all around the olive-shaped area; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand back longer than until the flesh of the key is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist II lines; and if there remains no pain at all, make incisions above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the shoulders or the armpits, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the corruption of the scab
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When itch comes to pustules, and the boils descend to the groin and it is new, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, he does not annoy me that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the evil descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between my hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then cauterize below the itch on the bone of the elbow, and mark a sign like a half-circle above the body; then scald the cauterization in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is pale and ejects stool.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then straighten the bowels to their place; and hold his hand above so that they do not return; and work well on the patient's hips, and put one cushion and one servant under him, and another under the breast which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of the whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it at the first time, start again as many times as needed to reach the bone; and be careful subtly that the bowels do not burst when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children are subtle according to their measure, and those of great people also great according to their measure; after three days, care for the bone at the site of the cautery so that the scabbing is removed; afterwards, care for other ointments until they are healed, and have the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his stitches be loosened long enough, so that the bowels do not protrude when he will wish to go to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise up, have a well-made bandage applied to him, and keep it on for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, lest he trouble himself too much and take care not to drink or eat too much and not to cough loudly; and when he has followed this instruction, then is he entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the surgery of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the itch of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come to other wounds and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then do the fire cautery on the fire as needed according to its quantity, and let it burn the third part of the key; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the old ones have said that one should cauterize at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the first point at the beginning and draw a line across the ulcer's width above it, and another below it, and then insert your hand into the entire cautery carefully.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are more gentle and subtle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its thinness, weakness, and virtue, and its location in terms of torments and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's well; if not, start another cauterization on it, for such a case is that he should be changed to the member that is closest to him, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of sickness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The members are helped sometimes by cauterization with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it's cured according to what we said in the division, and doesn't descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption won't spread throughout the patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: I in the middle of the head up to nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on both horns, and I behind on the back; and leave your hand so that the cauterization comes as far as the bone, and so that the scales come out if the vapors of gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the sickness is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries we have said on the head, and 1 cauterization behind the nape of the neck, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the hump and another below, and 2 on each shoulder; and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the breast, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take heed of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the shoulder-blade, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I do with a cautery, the more it helps him, and shows its benefit; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery just as the healthy person feels, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, wash it with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and he is not yet healed, then make a cautery on the member according to its greatness or smallness; and let the cautery be just a little bit into the flesh of the member; then treat it with ointments until he is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one makes a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is taken out the swelling; and yet no one intervenes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "ulcers" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes with a cauterization a little deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the vein, until the blenchour is removed, and its color changes; then apply a poultice made with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colander and almond, each one in equal parts; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a cloth, and air it at the bedside until he is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize around the channel with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet it does not seem to me good, because I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already experienced this once; and more rightly is it that it should be cauterized around, with a cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», and elle tarde de meurer or por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait or por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est à dire trop vieux) and il a peu de sang, ou por le temps; and tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize around of many small cauterizations in piercing; after that, he leaves it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization so that its form is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizations have pierced through the skin, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them externally in such a way that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterward, care for him until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of sickness is called "corrodens", and it's nothing else than a consumption of member, for it consumes members just like fire consumes dry threads.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this sickness in a place that can suffer fire and cautery together, then use small and great clavicles of cauterization according to the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all corruption, and none remains, except what is consumed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the cauterized areas to soothe them, until all the burn blisters caused by fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments generates flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy is sometimes cured by medical treatment in place of fire cautery; but all the same, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medical treatment in its division: take what you need when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pins which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often happens that at the end of the foot a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large defect that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as hot as a tile oven, and it should be made of good iron to its measure so that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and there are fine edges; afterwards put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then apply a poultice of wild marjoram crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be detached from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the joint with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by external wounds to the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, it is necessary that you bring a water cauterization; and do thus: take a bronze or iron tube, or a vulture's feather, and put it on the wart and all its warts; and place the tube so that it surrounds everything, then put a little hot water in it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn, so that the edge of the tube reaches the root of the wart, and can find the hot water's way to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself entirely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do one after another, until you have reached all those who are inside the body, then cure the swellings that bring forth flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cures of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver from cold or heat, or quartan fever, or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization; if the patient shivers, and the healthiness of the cold disease will hasten.
des pustules puans	the stinking pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, appearances become apparent on the outside of the body, or pustules that stink, which come from great corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mulberry wood, by which the point is seized by the fire, or a long root of aristologe, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at times when the cauterized ones are treated from the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further forward, but the superfluous parts that come from them are broken off and healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it happens that great flows of blood come from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to someone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tight until the blood is appeased beneath your fingers, and no more drips; then take a few small and large cauterizations, all red from fire, and take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put it on that vein which you are holding with your two fingers, and hold the cautery thus until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization is extinguished, then take quickly another one of the cauterizations that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is staunched; and take care that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched without one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong bandaging with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained in a suitable manner.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about the stanching by binding tightly with cloths or by placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if there is no benefit whatsoever.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and stretch them well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move his hand, but moisten with cold water often enough so that the blood is congealed, thickened, and staunched; and make inquiries ahead about what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in our first chapter all the diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the remedies and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way for those who want to find things more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who suffer so much with their illness that they will die quickly due to the distress they find in their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are some among these who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetise, and do not rashly but wisely of what you are certain and can take hold of, and use prophesy and indication in the cures of your patients for whose salvation may be converted; and thus it will help you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Here is the translation:
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in describing chapter by chapter, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have described from the beginning to the end, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Two full heads of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often afflicts children at childbirth, and when the midwife constrains too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is best to hasten the work in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be sustained; and believed so much moisture that he would die, and this moisture is assembled below the bone above the forehead, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut a wide incision in the head's midst; and let it be as long as two inches, until the moisture runs out; and look at the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head opening on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After binding the wounds with cloth and powders, and putting vinegar and oil in, and leaving it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound by tents and ointments, and let the head become dry, and only give food to the patient to eat dry meat with as little moisture as possible until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look where the great opening of the abscess appears, and the assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then at the place where the abscess opens, and the filling of water, and make the incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there comes a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone a disease which is called "catarre" in the eyes or at the breast, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help at all, then the final cure is the cautery with what one will cut off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, when you see the wounds covered, that the patient makes his head go back; after which he should rub the place with a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then have the patient remove his neck from the entire cloth; then look and see if the vein bleeds, and the pulses of one and the other are afterwards above the ears, and they should be responded; then mark the pulses by pointing, then cut both with an acicular spatula to two parts, so much that the edge of the scalp comes to the bone, and it is done in a wide area.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above it, cutting just as two would crosswise.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will jump out continuously outside.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to sensation, so it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign and stop at the bone; and what is needed for blood to be put outside is six times, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the sphac, so cut off that apostemes do not come there, then stop the wound and bind, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and sharp catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and heats in the temples and old forgotten and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all that does not help at all, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back his temples' hairs, and listens to the artery which appears in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and rise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the leather lightly until you come to the artery, then train it upwards with tweezers, and depart well from each layer that is below each part; and if the artery is fine, so turn it to the point of the needle, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Because if it's not cut, then blood does not flow fully at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of .vi. c., up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no purulence may come before the healing of the wound, and there be decorremens of blood; then cut off the superfluity which is between the two ties at that very hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the remaining part with the cautery knife up to the bone until the arteries are cut off; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: therefore it is of greater aid to the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts a well-made tent on top; and when one removes them, be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents until they are healed; and if there is no cort of the artery as long as you work, then hasten to cauterize by cautery, or take vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on top of the place until the blood congeals, and rise the place with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as necessary; and what is most important and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to keep their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thick, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two cutlery pieces a space of a good thumb's length, and then when you have signed to join the two parts, and you must put the hot iron on so that it reaches just to the bone, and make the incision in two places; and be distant between the two joints because this cautery is not done from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done there, and you see the face of the patient growing red, and feeling the forehead to be agitated as if with fear; and the skin is tender and moist so that the hairs of the paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it "contused cure", and it is that you do for the patient who has this disease by cutting the hairs on his forehead, then making three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one incision be like two threads going down in front, as far as the nose, and the others two are at two borders above the papillae, and beware of cutting into the arteries which are at two borders above the papillae; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and make each wound three finger widths across; and have a piece of sponge and much cloth ready so that the blood can be absorbed, then pour in the absorbent liquid up to where it is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is next to the temple all the way down to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two cuts right up to the suture that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision all the way down to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, not at all sharp, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the knife towards the cauterized flesh at the heart, and the cutting edge away from the bone, and press so that it comes to the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the point that opens at the heart, and then make another incision in the middle opening up to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then put a tent of old cotton into each opening, and put wet cloths on it in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard against abscesses that may arise; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply great poultices of boiled water, then the cure of basilicum ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the swelling of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone comes with a severe catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs falling, and the head in the forehead in great pain, and the patient is worn out; then learn through these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come forth except from many voices, and the mother cure that is there, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to straighten his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another one of equal width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision down to the bone; and move your hand away from the ridges of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood ooze out onto a sponge, then dry it with cotton wool between the two lips of the incision and put in old linen; then lay wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil on top; and take care to prevent hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to form, then treat with caustic substances that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same way: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of galenicals, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to bring forth flesh all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppering of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of three things: either grains, or beasts, or pebbles from the mine or similar things like iron; or seed, such as jay's wheat, lentils, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it forms in the ear or in some other way that does not belong to the ear and does not grow in the ear, so set the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a small amount of purple oil or sesame oil, and apply the extraction; and when the swelling comes, make it external with compresses, and stop up the nostrils when the swelling arrives, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Very often it happens that pus comes forth through this treatment; and if it does not come forth, then apply an extraction with subtle forceps, because of which the shape is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps forth through the forceps, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with a subtle onyx file of small double reed; and if it does not jump forth through this, then make a ring of iron and insert the chief of the ring or ear plug firmly into the ear canal, and stop what is around the ring from entering with it using soft wax; then treat it further, for many times it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this way, then take a lump of which takes birds and put some instrument that is pointed to do so, and wrap it with a small amount of cotton; then press the lump on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat further.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump forth through all these things that we have said, then you should hasten to cut the ear, lest an abscess form and spasms occur; and the manner of cutting is as follows: first, let the patient recover from the cephalic disease, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends; and be the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the pebble, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is swelling that has formed and it is inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one quarter of a spoonful held subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision in that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle forceps and suction, as we said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then that flows into the ear it is necessary for the patient to use an external compress first and wrap the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it rest on that very ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps away because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your piece should be held tight and light, and heat them slightly over the fire; and put the patient one or two piercings in his ear, and step back on it from the other side, and hit another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop hitting stone upon stone until all the water comes out, and thus she jumps out altogether; and if you see, then take a reed, and put one end of the stem into the ear, and the other end hold over the fire until the thickest part of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds as long as the water comes out, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it has a small body, like a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of earworms from the ears, when you have cured as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if you see any worms, treat them with subtle pincers; and if you do not see, take the cane where there is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle poultice to the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then succeed in tying tightly all the bandages; do this often until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop around the bandage with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the cauterization of worms, and you will find it in treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, because this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be made of thick silver or bronze below to one small hole, and above over for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument of well-made bronze for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wrap it around the pointed part with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and whatever medicines you have in the cane, and let the cane be in the ear; then blow inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and if the patient feels inside, and the distillations are one pot heated by fire thus that it distills into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppering of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a perforation in the ear; and this same thing happens to men by stoppering of wound or char born inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes quite far into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes there is one pot too much for the perforation, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes quite far in, if one cannot see it, is from grievous inflammation in multiple dispositions, and that which one sees, needs you to put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, then work with all this spoonful according to the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be gentle and cautious in front and back of the whole ear, so that it does not harm the ear; if the opacity is of born char or flesh of the ear, then take it with subtle pincers and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the polulations are through in the ear, then take a subtle and light rasp and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it in the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pustulation from which the patient feels grief at hearing, pierce lightly, and take care not to strike the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian myrrh.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another moistened tent made of rosate oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes from the wound, then dip a sponge in cold water, and wrap it around the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of paper-makers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This mixture that comes from paper-makers of eggs when they are moist and dry, needs you to stretch them with forceps and pincers, and cut off a spoonful of their roots; then put on the white vitriol broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if the skin is peeled off, then cauterize the lenticular subtlety of the cautery, and the cauterizing after the incision works as a remedy; and many times they repair themselves, except that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the hawthorn
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to papers of eyes certain things that seem like frost in their form and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the operations are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the incision in the wide part, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper slightly, do not harm the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing to force it, for the ointments will restore it soon and bring forth flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Et if the wax is dripping inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn it over and scrape off any impurities, and press it firmly from one side to the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not matter; and when the wax is scraped off, then remove the salt water from the ear and cure the part of those who suffer from a wound as long as the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is spread on paper towels above, and this happens more in children than in adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they come with catharrhes in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep upon them, and are their paper towels moist beneath their eyelids that the swelling and appearance have covered over the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lid at your eyebrows and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient puts their head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent-like shape around it, according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and put it on them; and press with your thumb on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make an incision in the moist area above the spine, cutting a slit as wide as the wound one makes when opening a vein; and cut the skin so deeply that you come to the exinach; and in several positions, the exinach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take it out as one piece of cloth that has been folded between your thumbs at the edge, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to push it into the slit, lest you reach all the way to the oil, and you hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit until it appears; then take it out as we have said, then wet the cloths with oil and water, and put them on the eye, and strain through bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who burn and put on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment continues until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the hot joint, then apply poultices soothingly until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the eyelids
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on the eyelids other than natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of illnesses such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water according to what is written in the chapter on cautery, and this is done either by incision and suturing or by caustics, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid paper towards your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into each thread above; and have this at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull one thread upwards along the entire paper, and turn it to a razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the adjacent hairs, all the way to the spine, from the great tear duct down to the small one; then extract one thread, and put under the paper a small tent made of cotton and cloth, then sign on top of the paper a figure like that of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the eyelid paper being divided into.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier con cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusque petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturels en la groissece d’un rai, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles du keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres à une costure d’une aguille à tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluité des filz sus les II sorcilz à tout aucunes choses gluans, si tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusque III jors ou IV; puis cure la plaie sans costure de choses secantes et constrigantes, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sans paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu signes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, à III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what rises above in small pieces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and things are not equal, then take a needle where there is thread, and put it in the figure; and put the other thread near the great wound, and the second thread near the small one, and join the two threads equally between your hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with ointment and similar softening remedies; and sometimes happen that the hairs of paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of caustics is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision in it according to what I have said, and then make two caustics by art, and two fine threads as long as the eyelid paper and the width of the spine are; and cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the eyelid paper, and strain the two caustics from the two parts in form; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and turn black and fall away, until it drops off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound takes a long time to heal, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the shape of the two canine teeth that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert one silk thread of the same subtlety; then assemble the threads and join one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange in the hunt another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head on your lap; and be under the sun so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and small work, then push the needle through all the chase to the root of the hair next to, and make it pierce the paper hastening as you move above the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the top of the chase, and push into the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs come forth all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from the pimple above and you see it with the sight of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eyes and leave it two or three days, until the hair grows back to its place and the flesh forms a scab; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural beard, and lift it up with that one where you leave it, until it is stretched out and then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pouring of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" comes into the eye, so there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to work on it is that you cut open the wound, and release the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and tie it until it heals; and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but you work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or ale and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments made from dayaquilon melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and then cure this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not heal in a way different from how it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath and truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental comes from a wound and an incision and a cautery and similar things; and the way of working in it is that you take a needle with double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left armpit as far as the right, so that the threads come out in two holes of the flesh; then tie the flesh above the entire needle, and cut at the spatula's broad end.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's figure comes back according to what is needed, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and be the holes of the two incisions at the two angles of the cut that you have made, and be one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no name "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are accustomed to being below, from what is under the paper; then join the two parts together and sew them with a thread of linen; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from incision or cutting or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then sever between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an artifice of all their power so that they can bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many ways similar to the paper above being bound with white of egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a razor below the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to the pincers, until you cut what is at the spatulate blade, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatulate blade is too tight or bleeds into the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove that assembled part, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let the whole assembly be healed, and sometimes in the oil, salty water, and then lift it with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a cloth of linen, and place on the oil moist flaxseed in abundance of yolk; and after the third day use vinegar and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the inflammation of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the inflammation is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when touched with iron and cooked at pincers, cannot be removed; and both kinds of inflammation begin near the great eyelid, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your lap, then you open the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the inflammation at pincers with small double folds, and stretch it above; then take a needle and put one hair from horse, cow, or ox on it, along with a strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the inflammation, and make it pierce all the way to the needle, and tie the inflammation with a thread and stretch it above, and remove the remaining portion at the edge of the inflammation that comes from the prunele and the silk up to the chief; then cut off what remains in the root of the eyelid to the spatulate blade and the small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that the body does not come forth with tears habitually; and sometimes the inflammation settles at the onyx alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then one removes all the spatulate soft from what is left:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prunelle is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of burnt oil into the eye, and make a powder of litargire, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be done so that it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the awl in, and the splinters cannot enter, many times this resemblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and it happens as I have counted in the division, and if you see it cover, then work on the patient's eye, and take the spatula lightly, and make an incision according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail off slowly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a powder made of litargire and red oil and burnt oil, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as a hot abscess, then drain it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts in the eye by great harm, then suspend it with a splinter, and cut off a part but not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red oil made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the prunelle
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Es eulz d'aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, and cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, and semble une rose de balauste; and li ovraiges si est that the patient puts his head in the surgeon's hand, then the surgeon works the eyes, and coils all that flesh into suitable incisions for this, and sustains it by force; then cuts the first layer of skin, and goes all cutting to the razor until the end, and takes care not to cut the eye during the operation; and be the incision like we said in the incision of the lung and with small forces where one removes the shell, as the form shows after this chapter; and when the incision is complete and removed all flesh, then pours oil on the surface or you distill red juice and similar corrosive medicines, and puts a cotton cloth on top with egg white, so that it is secure for hot aposteme; and if there's nothing left, and the wound becomes inflamed, and you doubt about hot aposteme, then leaves the oil and cures the hot aposteme with soothing things; then returns to his operation until he is healed, and thus makes all the skin layers stuck in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is also necessary that you ease the cure of each weak eye by natural way; and by accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that this member can suffer from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red when they are covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of seeing and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary for the first that you look at where the eye is, if it is healthy, and there is no other disease except that of the eye; then the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins all along the neck according to your wisdom, and be the ligatures subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two splinters by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the forces of those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and take care not to bleach the eye with points of spatula; and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not cut too much than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red oil to corrupt what is left of the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all that in one hour, then make an application on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and are secure from hot abscess; then resume according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the abscess of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor calls it "arissati" abscess: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in it that you cut into the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it out with all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to one chief rent, and be pointed as a razor as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is healed, and flesh has grown, and the body of the bowel is healed, and remains so for XL days, and it does not renew and is not apostemated, and bad things do not happen, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other cause than to bring the fistula back to its original place according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time by fire, and with medicinal waters, and when it has been uncovered take a forceps according to this form, and have the iron rod at three angles, and the wax be reduced until the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, and esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant the eyes appear to be full of pus in all and all, and it does not come from a disturbance or diminishment, then it is necessary that you lie the patient; then heal the wound, then apply poultices or a hot iron to help it heal; then put on top one layer made of aloe, encens, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eyes, and anoint them with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, and fold each into four parts, and then put one on top of the other according to what the eyes need; then strain by wrapping it with a strong bandage, and renew the poultices in order to help heal without causing harm; then remove the poultices and let the eyes be strained day and night, and if the layers become moist, then it is necessary that you strain them much; then remove the layer after day and night, and if you see the eyes repairing themselves, it is good; but if not, then renew the anointing and the cloths and the layer and the poultices until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Through the bursting of the conjunctival fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disturbances come to the conjunctival fabric, then it bursts open, and comes out in paper-like sheets as if a resin grain, and it is astonishing to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you put an awl into the root of the part below just up to the part above, then put another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid part; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its disposition; then cut the top of the double thread and tie one part of the conjunctiva around, and strain it well, then extract the awl and put on the oil a moist layer in abundance of egg white; and let it be until the threads cling with the conjunctiva, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the conjunctiva each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear swollen, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the depth of the eye, and clear out the excess moisture and descend into the eyes, and enter soon after; then strain it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This malady which is called "alcunnati" is not far from the bow in the eye, resembling an aqueous humor descending, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright siege, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the bow come up to your eyes; then it should be inserted, and not descend and be dislodged by light, and let the patient see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula-like thing and place it on the corneal fabric at the point where the conjunctive continues with the cornea and crown, as long as the bow comes out; and when it has come out, let it distill into the hot aqueous humor mixed with honey or honey and fenugreek is boiled and mixed with honey, then be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have found the likenesses of waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing; so work accordingly with health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and the good eye should be and strained very much; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument which is called "almagda", or on your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a reed in that blank corner of the eye to the lesser tear channel; then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces in the blank corner of the eye, and sense that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prunele just to the end of the nourishment; and that is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument just above or below an opening after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little, and if the water rises again in the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise further, then extract the almagda lightly by turning your hand poco poco; and then return to water a little bit of good gemstone, and leave the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by pouring the oil in a stopper or a moist cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg white, and tie with pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our time, put on a common broth with abundant egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then only pierce the conjunctive, and don't go too far in depth, but make it subtle, then put in almagda, just as we said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient to rest well, lying on his back in a darkened room; and be quiet from all movements, and take light foods, and don't move his head or turn him right or left, and be tied according to his condition until three days later; then release him in that same darkened house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the tie up to seven days later; and it's not necessary for you to do this during the course of the cure or after the incision now, but rather you should hasten this process because the water is rising quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Se apostemes chaus vient, that thou removest the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then remove the sight and put on its face a layer to cover for some day, and be thus in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go forth from the house little by little, and turn back into its condition; and know that no disciples should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his land people pierce their almagda (a type of wart) with water, but I never saw anyone do this in our land nor did I ever read about it in books of old; and by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of warts, because he who does not know them sees them; and they are properly of earth.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of these warts are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three angles are watery.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At times new or old chars emerge together, of which some appear to be like scorpians in many feet; and if there are such that the skin is inflamed with fiery color, and the skin soft with pale color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then in the one of those skins that is soft and not inflamed, it is necessary that you have the patient sit between your hands toward the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour vinegar into those skin sores, and treat them with fire; then take what you can sustain by the subtle point of a needle from one side, as long as you know that that skin is entirely open.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any part remains that you cannot remove, then open it with all .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that there is nothing left; and if without causing harm, or abscess opens, then cauterize as needed; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is staunched and all the warts are removed, then pour wine, oil, or vinegar onto the nose.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the child does not work and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is flesh in the bone above, whereupon instruments do not come to cut: then you must put a linen thread about a finger thick, and be wetted by hands, and have between each night's space or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in their own bed to some power, and lead them into an odorant scent so that it comes through the thread inside the mouth; and many times do this with children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief which comes through the thread in one hand, and the other chief which comes through the mouth in the other hand, and know one after another as we are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	So long as you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then take the child, stop the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back in its place just as before; do that for three days or more, until all that remains of flesh is consumed by the ointments; and then put a linen bandage on the child for some days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, through which one distills oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp like a cane, and conduct thus; and if you see, then make a closed cane, and the instruments full to purge the head; and have one band at the head to hold when heating oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and grows and becomes great in time, until it is visible to look at; and therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all impurities, then put the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it as long as it is great, be wary if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touchment, not of foul color, and you see that you can remove all of it, empty the patient's head and cut without fear, and cure the head with things restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knows that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these joint works, it profits little, more so than in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore that you do as follows with each one, if you examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together to a seam, then care for it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their crust until they heal, then bring the two lips together to a seam, and bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and incense upon it; and place a piece of strong or another kind of plaster on top, and let it be for as long as it cures by itself, then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have within their lips abscesses hard, resembling grains of millet, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the lip after the incision of vitriol, until the blood is staunched; and then anoint with oil, and cure the lip with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a wart grows on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you support it with tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on top of the wound vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders; and if that wart returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the sorors (sorores)
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are assembled in the chief of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as corruption comes to the gum, and they are the teeth that stink; therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his teeth be in thy sight, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness, and jaundice and other blemishes, until they are cleaned away; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, then one renews the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because those who pluck out the teeth to remove decayed teeth have different forms than those who remove between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with thee.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you wait to draw it out as long as you can, for this should not be done quickly; for it is a very high substance so that there is no excuse for drawing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to pull out, you must be certain about the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	The patient's pain continues many times, and he thinks it is from the tooth of Saint Denis, and makes a good attempt to pull out the tooth; but in any case, the pain does not depart on this account until the evil thing has come out, for we have already learned to do so with these saints; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula as hard as possible to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your two or tenaciously fine pincers at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted; then secure the pincers well; and the patient's jaw should be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and push it inside from each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and wounded, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the perforation is; and if it is strained subtly with pincers, that it does not break while being strained; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum for dislodging the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And make sure that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and the tooth will come back to the patient through the evil of the root, causing greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jaw, and do not bring back what we have told; but often bring great harm through the roots that remain, or through the jaw they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is torn out, wash the place with wine, vinegar, and gall; and if blood comes forth, which often happens, fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one should extract teeth first, are to be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be made of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling out, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to hold firmly in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the shoulder, it is necessary that you place a moistened cotton cloth on the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the skin is softened, then put in forceps called "algefri", so that the head seems to be well-groomed; and let them be made inside just like a file, and that's their form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the cart entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to know palying, of which this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these things, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you aid with this instrument that has two springs, of which this is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like great pincers, whose shape is this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should be made so that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of cases, and if one breaks the cartilage or the other bones, or it can, then seek out the instruments that you need, which I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, whose shape is this:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be big and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the area with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then reduce it with all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form and the shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be shaved or filed: then extract it; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is this, and which resembles a small beak, and be made of well-forged iron with a point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping goes slowly and slowly in hands of days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file it with a similar file whose shape is this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth slowly and slowly in hands of days lightly, so that it does not move until it is trimmed; then make it even at the end with any scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then file away the roughness as long as it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is loose, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without it falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines and that doesn't work; so they must be restrained with a gold thread, because silver sons become green and perish, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see aligning the teeth, then take the thread and put it double between two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth between my teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, until it does not move anymore; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the end of the thread to a pair of forceps, and assemble it, and reattach it between two healthy teeth, so that it does not injure the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the threads break, then bind it with another thread; it will thus remain and serve for a whole time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Et when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and does not intervene except by someone who is wise and patient, and sometimes makes the shape of a whalebone tooth, and puts it where the defect is, and holds it tight like we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to bind the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no instance where this thread comes from under the tongue or by nature; it arises either when someone is born that way or by accident of a wound being sutured; and the work is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, with their head in your healthy one, and lift up the tongue; then tie the nervous thread to the large part, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it's due to a sudden wound, then apply the poultice and tie that bond; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you are done, lift up the liquid rose and easy water, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent; and keep the patient in this way every night, so that the wound cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bloody discharge comes forth, then place it on the glassy surface and broil it; and if the blood spreads, then cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it as being of fusse color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining into blenchor, and there is moisture, then put in a compress, and make a small poultice, and deliver from one side to the other; and if the blood increases at your work, put vitriol powder on top until it is stopped, then return to your work until you have done everything right; then lift up the rosewater and vinegar mixture, and cure with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes a swelling comes within the throat called "godath", and one properly calls them "glanders", and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, beware: if it is an abscess of small sense and fusiform color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch with iron, also because of the bloody discharge; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it out, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is a whitish color, and the root is subtle, prepare your instrument to cut, but first make sure that the abscess has calmed down and is appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sit the patient before the sun, and his limbs be in their natural state, and the work be done on the mouth and the servant take hold of the tongue between his hands, and press the tongue downward to all the instrument, for this is its form; and it can be made of silver or subtle iron just like small knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take a compress and insert it into the almond, and draw it up above as far as you can; and draw nothing else with it, then bind at the instrument, so that it forms, which seems like one force; and yet the head is bent, and one side to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then bind it with pincers, so that it forms:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be torn from one side and the other; and when you have bound one of the almonds, then bind the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and vinegar mixture, and if there is decoration of blood, gargle the patient with water or cooked grape pome husks, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so bind them then in this way as the two almonds are bound.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense; and I had well closed off all the throat, so that the woman could not expire because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced its way out through two holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Then I acted quickly and inserted one probe, then the discharge flowed, and there was a great deal of pus; then I reinserted the probe into the other nostril, and opened up the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the probe into this abscess, and cut out a part, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the passage in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing back, and filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; then I encircled and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained growing; and I departed from those parts, leaving God to do with them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it grows downward to the socket, and it is emptied and is long, so it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and rounded, then it is called "socket".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the boil or abscess is calmed down, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut; and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a rusty color or black, then it is necessary to avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to have the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the catheter into the socket, and guide it downward, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is outside of natural bounds; for if you cover more, you will cause harm to voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of II almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about covering, then you must use cunning at the cauterization of the senses to dispel fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is hot and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and mixes with hot and living coal, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handle of this instrument, in which is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put it in a place, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaved according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it is of silver or of copper, and one of the keys is inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is deadened; afterwards it often resumes, until the eye dries, and be sure you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things happen there; nor do this thing except at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a thread and put a quill of egg inside the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the quill of egg does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is applied to the throat or spine of a fish or any thing; so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue on the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is purged through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a lettuce root, or one piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it comes up, it will be strained, and then you will pull out; and if it does not come up with what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head lifted upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life depart from it, nor push the bone inside; and it is better for the patient to insert the instrument, because then or the thing is purged; if they insert it downward, or pull it out slowly with all the instrument equal, until it is pulled out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the snot from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	The flesh is not healed, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the patient's throat to the sun, then press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see sweat, so treat it with small needles or subtle forceps that are good for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a hair-thin cord and tie it around the patient's throat, then heat the point where the cord meets the skin with fire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is bothered by water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full pitcher of cold water, and make the patient spit it out, and swallow it without gluttony, and move their mouth often with their hand; and as soon as the sweat feels the water, let them spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not spit as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asafetida at the instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will clear without effort.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has live coals, and there is a cloth covered with a perforated sheet in the middle, and in that hole is the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but reaches just to the sweat; and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to pass through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one pulls out the snot is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps suitable for entering the throat; and it has a resemblance to a bird's beak, and has asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered here after one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it's in two manners in which one is similar itself, and that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, until the bowels are moist according to their completion; and if there are such as it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, just like those abscesses which are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them until they are rotten around, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it is rotten, it will harm the principal member; or it is at the foundation, so one should pierce it when it is dead; and it is not necessary that you pierce a hard abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is near the foundation, lest it spread inwardly and become a fistula; and then it cannot heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess when it has died according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departures of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and of swelling and disquieting of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears to be; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and nerves, and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pleasure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who suffer, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh that is hardening, then it is best to leave the puncture so that it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be drained of venom from there, and will be full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and the underlying parts may become hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according as it is needed by the members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions in small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where one must cut the skin and cover; when it has become as dry as rags and is no longer pulsating, then do as one does with babies: and if there are those that are split in three angles, and if there are those whose edges are cut like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses from angels; and if there are those where you make a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil who have not point of chief, if like aposteme soft superficial, it is necessary that you make perforations peacefully; and it is necessary when the apostemes are big, and they have gathered great bowe, and you make perforations, so do not pull out all the bowe in this hour, but pull out part of it; then stop the aposteme just until another day, then pull out nothing else from there; do that several times at your pleasure, until the bowe is completely gone; likewise if the patient has weak vitality, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the hopes tremble at times with the exit of the bowe, lest by chance the patient dies, and you do not take heed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your aposteme, if the wound appears, and look to see if the wound of the aposteme is small; and if it is a smooth incision, then try to place a tent made of linen or old cotton there; and if it is a large aposteme, and there are many holes, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together against each other; and if you have cut into the aposteme a part of skin, and you have wrapped it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a compress made of linen without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs at your operation, then administer cold and easily flowing water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the area bleeding many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said to be good in this book, and if it is in winter, and the abscess or aposteme is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the abscess is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then detach the aposteme and the pus and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses; and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from the head, and they are like the manners of those who are on threads, just as a tailor is with a spider's web, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some big and fat ones that have moisture like blisters; and if there are those that are hard and stony to cut into, and one is not afraid as long as the artery does not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the tailor is that you test all the instruments that are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes after, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, make a hole in it above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape it without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and let it be until the next day; and those who remain from night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then rewrap the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third day, until you know well that it does not remain wet; then treat the wound with ointment in a suitable manner, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess does not grow fat, then cut it according to this form, from long; and remove your fingers, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in pulling away the cloth where it lies; and if the arteries make you feel contrary, do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same with the abscess if it is stony, and cutting and curing as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on top of the stony abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, because they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or the one I saw on an old woman's head had no moisture, and those were the abscesses that I cut on an old woman's head; and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if someone had done anything to it, they would have made as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	En others abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come to the chief of children and roots of ears, let the opening be always at its most dependent place, so as to make the pus issue; and the wound to be cured as it is needed.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are many, and are joined together one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, just as the night and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Then, if you see one with a good disposition for touching, and it resembles the color of the body, and is quiet on all sides, and is not inflamed at the neck or artery or conduit, and is not too deep; then you must scrape it above, and cut away each part, and use the two lips of the knife to sew up, if you need it, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and work slowly and carefully, making sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor be too hasty with the spatula, lest your hands slip and you do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you lance the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound a vitriol poultice, or some powders that stop bleeding, and bind the wound; and leave it so that the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; and then look at your patient's wound to see if there are any small scrofulae, and cut them out and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary for you to cut out that scrofula in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall away without harm; then fill the wound with old Egyptian cotton dipped in oil, and then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, then there will be no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it and pull forward, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that retain superfluity, open there where it appears to be the most inflamed; and open as has been said before, depending on this, then you should apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that what remains of corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleansed, then apply a poultice to draw out the flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	of scabies
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have scabies, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be opened; and one does not make aid by these means, because all the veins and the pomegranate of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pomegranate, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four small incisions across, between the two circles or according to the size of the syphac wound, not in the cartilage; and this way is suitable for the section of the epiglottis so that there will be no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, so it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all the edge, then cuts the leather until it comes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the suture, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein at the chin which jumps forth by the broken joint and by the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all around without leaving any cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Also it is said that one should not do this just yet until the throat is entirely swelled, and the patient is judged to be on the point of death, and the breath fails.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglote for that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this, the ancients command to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command to sew up the wound and cure it, until it is cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young lady take the knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the womb; and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that she had not cut the vein nor conducted it far from the throat, and the veins were flowing freely through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healed; and nothing befell the young lady except that she lost her voice, and returned to her usual state; therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of jasper, and it is very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural, and accidental; or if it is natural, it has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is in two manners, of which one is like fat tissue, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be worked on with force except in a small one, and prove and search all around: if you find it to be like fat tissue, and does not fit into any vessel, then cut it off, just as one cuts off fat, and treat it thoroughly, if there is any; and examine well, and cure it as needed, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of the fat
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are ours, of which I will say all similar things; and now it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between us and exit.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is hot and feverish, holding fast until the ebullition has passed, and the corruption is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the nout there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains within it the sap, which is its own bag and follows the color of the body, and begins also like a wasp, and becomes large; and are according to two likenesses, either fat or moist, and with many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the fat, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments called "entrails", according to what its form will be or chapter which comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses from us is that you take or find the moistest part that you see in the abscess, and turn your two pincers back and forth until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess; then extract the instrument, and be careful so that it does not jump forward.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	Se moistor corrans cort, that will color it have, so let it be done as I said of other abscesses;
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it stays nothing, then comes the news again many times; and if there is a little left, and blood grieves, then apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put hot soothing things on top of the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the news is great, then cut off two lips of the wound, and cure those who injure the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or another thing that is contrary to you, or if you hurry and apply the lead of vitriol powder, and let it be for two days or three, until the wound purrs, and rest the ebullition of blood; then return to cutting off what remains of the fat.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Behold the shapes of the twisted instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb"; and there are also of three kinds: great, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula; and they are like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are made of yellow citrine, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most tested for blacksmithing purposes to encircle the curvatures of fistula; and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the ulcers are many and similar, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and also there are ulcers that have two shapes in three ways; and also there are ulcers that have three shapes, and are the same in three ways; and also there are ulcers that have two shapes, and a single shape only, and are the same in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are cutting, and some have only just cut on one side, from which we scrape the flesh, because it is not suitable to touch the vein or nerve; and among these are the alembics replying in bands, so that the patient does not become aware of the opening of abscesses; and they come in three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use them excessively except on charmed places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and in similar places; and sometimes one makes a very small instrument, resembling scrapers for fingernails, according to this form, with which we stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals with completeness of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Breast swelling occurs in some men when they begin to decay, until it seems like a woman's breast; and remain swollen and puffy, and whoever wants to cure them, must do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and apply a medicinal paste to the wound, letting it set with flesh; then bring together the two lips of the wound at their edge, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast droops down, and is swollen due to its great size as in women, so cut it into two sections above, by two similar incisions; thereby one part will be attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line .b. to line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about edge and powder, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it stay until it has consumed what remains and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses on the hips
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the hips are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and some of them contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the swelling that is in the abscess has gone down, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of a similar kind to scrofulas, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound swells, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is blocked and the skin above it is sewn shut, then many abscesses occur; and so too happens it with a vein that is swollen and an abscess; and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you sense it in your arms, then you sense extreme strain; and when it is due to the vein, then it is reason to flee appearances; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is below the armpits and shoulders and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to avoid the iron treatment, and also he who is at the head should avoid it, and in him who has a swollen artery, make an incision above the skin that is long; then open up the flesh as much as possible, and carefully detach the artery from the flesh, so that it is completely exposed; then insert a needle underneath, and have it pierce to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you about the extraction of the two arteries which are in temples; then tie off the place that is between the two ligatures with an interrupter so that the blood that is there flows out, and release the abscess; then apply the remedy as I have instructed you for a wound, until the ligature falls off; then cure those things that pertain to ointment accordingly, until it is healthy; and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then you should keep your hand on what you can remove from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle underneath where you hold in your hand, and have it pierce and there be a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess as I have told you, or tie off one of the two parts with the two keys of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then insert another needle underneath all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in four places; then cut away the abscess until the superfluous blood flows out, then cut away the superfluity of the skin and leave what is bound; then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and apply remedies for tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses on the knees
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses come from the artery and vein, abscesses on the knees come when they are fatigued or from too much heavy labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, and it happens more often in armpits and arms and in all places where there are joints, and that is a grievous abscess, and its color seems the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one strains at it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body, but beneath the skin; and it can be seen from all sides, and does not move forward or backward, nor below or above, and he who is in joints should not be cut by iron: perhaps there would be contraction; and he who is on the head or on the forehead, makes the leather to split.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, one should hold it with forceps and cut to its root; and if it is large, one should suspend it with an onychine, and flay it, then remove the bone and assemble the wound to the seam, and cure it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of big boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul,
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found XVIII onces weighing, and in the other VI ounces, and the work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of artemisia is white and moist and of subtle root; if it copes with spatula wide, and let the fire cautery be present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when the cutter comes often too great losses of blood, and if the blood flows forth, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread, and tie the artemisia as we have said, and leave it for 2 days; and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the linen thread until it consumes the artemisia, and choose by means of it what work is to be done; and if the roots are large, fear to cut them forth oneself because of the belly, but you may well cut off half, then cauterize so that it does not relapse; then cure the wound, and make sure you do not cut off the thulium which is of a flux color and poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enchanced, and I will come to the treatment of chancres here after.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	Se the appearance of the wound comes from fire cautery or cutting of sycamore bark, and is above the belly and in some of the buttocks, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or of pus; and if this is from the wound of sycamore bark and from the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hard, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it's because of blood, then it appears by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and has a quantity to it; and if it's because of pus, then it's soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is from the blood of an artery, or vein, or pus.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave the wound alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the abscess is due to the intestine or bowel, you should instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be straight as far as possible; then sign around the boil with your finger; then command him to sit quietly between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed all along the abdomen; then cut off half of the abscess above the great artery; then tie it around with a strong thread or cord firmly, and make sure the ligament is secure; then work on the remaining half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and put your index finger inside, and follow the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligament, release it, and push the intestine back into the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, take hold of it with the artery, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery or vein resists, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads on them, and put the needles through what you have done in a cross shape as when you are piercing; then draw the abscess up to four fingers above the needles, and if you see something, remove the needles, and leave the area alone until it can heal, and cut away the dead flesh by yourself; or you may need to cut it when it is subtle and perishable, then cure what needs curing, and let the abscess be as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound as needed, and seal the wound.
dou chancre	of chancres
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the likenesses of chancres, and how one should work with medicines, and how one must avoid iron treatment; and we say that chancres are born in the womb, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients say that when chancres are on the skin or in a place where it can be scratched like chancres which are in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one must completely remove it when it begins; and when it is great and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it; nor has anyone been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black coles once or twice; then make them healthy if they have manifest repletion; then dress the patient's wound well to do the work; then throw away your splints or chancres, and clean it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow fully, and press the wound gently with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have spoken of the likenesses of dropsy in the division, and how the assembly of water is done, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it is lit up only; and one should not touch iron on these two likenesses: it's to say, tympanites and hypochondriasis, for it is mortal things; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" from medicines, and the cure does not profit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as today's diarrhea and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy only, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus proceed: lift up the patient straight onto your hands, and the attendants press the belly outwardly pushing the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spatula-like spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And it should be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be incised at a point, and yet not so deep that it can come all the way to the intestine when one inserts it in, and cannot hurt; then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must cut in above the lower jawbone three fingers on top of the little finger; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the lower jawbone three fingers; and if it's due to mucus, then it will be on the right side, and it does not matter that the patient lies above the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak part; then pierce all the skin with this instrument, and plug it in, and lift your hand up to the whole spatula between the skin and the flesh just as when shearing at the size of an fingernail or about that; then pierce the flesh so that the spatula comes to the right place, and that is the vein's flow, then treat the water, and insert this instrument for which it is the shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it appears like a subtle silver chain, and is of earth or light archer's stone, and has in the part below one small perforation; and on the side from here, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is shaped as if cut with a pen, and this is the form of the incision that writers shape the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top are the almighty ones, such that when instruments come to water, they now descend upon the instrument; then empty it, either half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they fall facedown, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of their strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulses; then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the reason that stops the perforation which is above the syringe, of which I spoke, such that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw off a small quantity of water; do this some days, and take care not to overflow as long as there is still only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and leave him much water, so that he may be cured of sepulture or sandy earth, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and if he is instructed to drink; and the curing of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterizing on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	None are born children who do not have a pustule on the penis, or the pustules are small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it seems necessary at once to pierce through all the skin very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put the pustule in a small clove and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, then remove the clove and let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance there is no need, for the urine that comes out will not close it.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	That which belongs to the gout is small, so it is medicated with clove oil, as we have said, so that it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the gout in its place are blinded, because some people are born with the gout at the head of the penis, for which they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot reproduce because the matter cannot come to the womb, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and then the top of the penis is bent and cut like the shape of a pen nib, so that the hole opens in its place, as it should; and be careful not to disturb the blood that comes out many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops bleeding, and cure the wound until they are healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	These pustules often come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore, take them at one subtle poultice, and cut and clean all of them, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of foul color and foul smell, then it is necessary for you to apply a cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it open, and the boil is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary for you to remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is closed, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you treat it together, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and in its sheath; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply the poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vetch, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding comes forth, apply the lunar cauterization in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterization is helpful in two dispositions together: that is to say, in bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you tie a linen cloth around the urethra and make the patient urinate between; and when the hairs are rough at the head of the penis which have not been circumcised, or due to injury or abscess, it is necessary then that you remove it with a sharp instrument, so that the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis be freed from all parts; and if this is a troublesome thing to discuss, it is necessary that you remove it with a spatula-like instrument somewhat below the head of the penis and the skin; then wash it gently between two and put a thin damp cloth of linen in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the severing of continuity like other wounds; however, when we do this work by our own desire and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and seniors who performed circumcision around one inch, and with forces, and all a new needle; it would be cut because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is to cut again, and there is double pain, and at the purification which is above the skin is not assuredly secure the point of the member; and at the purification of the wound by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times it happens thus that they have no need for purification and I want this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is made with force, I have found the goodness of experience, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you press your hand, so it cuts evenly in all the tautness; but let the thread be well stretched around the leather; and be the manner of the first work such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not making him bind the thread around the shaft for more than just a little, and then make it relax in all the ways you can; then make it rest between your hands straight up, and repeat the forces between your hands or below your feet so the child does not see it, nor any of the tools; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or breathe, and train it to go up as far as the head of the shaft is; then clean it well of the filth that has assembled there, then tie a knot with a double thread, then tie below one link to another link; and hold it by both ends through the second loop at the pouch and the left index finger, and compress between the two links, then lift the breath above hastily and pull the head of the shaft; then let blood flow little by little, for this is what mothers do; and put powder on top and on top of the powder, a cloth glued to an egg white cooked without water, mixed with good rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for purification is this: two fingers should be held and should be pressing, and they should be equal to the width of a thumb.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the blood flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the lump makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it exceeds three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess is appeased, and lightly scrape; then cut as you can move, and be careful of the part of the penis, for it will harm nothing.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the wound with soothing powder, as we have said to treat powders, and if you cut too much from the skin, and it goes above, it will harm nothing; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Li retenue of the urine is caused by obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is stuck or lodged at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's abdomen as much as he can; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to express itself through the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come forth, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction using all the instruments which are called "siringue", and this is its form: and it should be made of subtle silver hair, like a bird's feather; and the cord should be one palm and a half long, and very fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the top of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the top of the thread inside the syringe; and remove the superfluous wool and put it just up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a siege, and raise the bladder and the urine tube with moist and olive oil and dry water; then put the syringe lightly into the urine tube as far as it comes to the root of the tube, then double the tube upwards towards the mouth; then put the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient come just to the empty thing, and that is not done according to this order unless because the guide or what goes in her is twisted; then remove the thread from all the wool and cotton, and the urine follows the wool, then strain it out, and make the urine flow again; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bleedings or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see it dripping with waters and medicines, then do with all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	Elle is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the wick is trimmed so that the medicine can flow well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the top of the syringe in the moisture, and pull on the pulling string which is inside; then pull the moisture into the syringe, and then push hard on the string inside; then the moisture will enter and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or archaic, and the head is higher; and below, one side or the cord falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see enemas the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pessary on the fire; then push the top of the syringe into the vagina, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is released, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then push the thread firmly into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dale, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do so with your hand as you did with the bladder, pressing until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between the stoned abscesses as regards rains, and all signs, and which kind of stone one should work on; and in the bladder, and in the sheath; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is stoned in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare-like, and the patient's sheath swells, and he pees many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones are formed at the foundations; and it is lighter to heal children until they are three years old, and it is much more grievous in old men, and it is moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with laxatives, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders searching for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and throw him backwards and move him down below, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and sometimes may fall from a great height; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards; then search and touch inside; if you feel the stone in position, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall when touched entirely, moisten your left index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a youth, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult; and insert it into his fundament, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then press it onto the neck of the bladder; then press up on your finger, and push it out behind where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the skin above in height, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the skin on the part where one makes the incision; then put in the spatula copant, which is this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between those who are between the testicles and the fundament, not at all in the middle but at the side of the left naively; and be straight on the stone, and your two feet should be against the fundament, and be the cut of the traversing if it is wide enough to push forward, and inwardly narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not at all too great; by chance the pressure so the foot that is on the fundament, that it jumps away without effort; and know that there are stones where there are angles, and edges: then it is hard to get out; and there are those which are hollow, similar to a gourd, and rounded, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And to those stones where there are angles and edges, make the cut more great; and if it does not jump, then it is necessary that you stretch over the pliers which are like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot bend it thus, then widen the hole and if the flesh falls off, then bind with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then butt first the largest against the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then pull out further, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be cut out, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out soon because the wound cannot heal; but always try to drain, or to extract with pincers, as much as you can pull it apart by pieces; and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put a damp cloth on top of oil and wine, or on oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then turn the patient over onto his back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, then raise the patient very well with oil and water, and then cure him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if the abscess becomes hot and boils in the wound, and coagulated blood forms in the bladder, and is retained by it, which prevents the urine from flowing with its usual rhythm: then open up the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and destroy it; then wash the wound with water, vinegar, and soap, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the operations you perform on him, that you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on his bed.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethral canal of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; so do what I say, that you cut many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go further into the bladder; then push the forceps into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the forceps slowly in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this because of anything that hinders it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then bend the penis around the stone between the two threads, then pull it out and loosen the string, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There often happens that the stone is inserted in women, and if it ever does, it is a grievous cure, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; and the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands;
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, so that it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and make the first incision small; then put the ruler in the incision if you sense the stone so far into the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many types of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood veins, then put white vinegar broth at the site, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is staunched; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to aid you in your work; and if the blood veins, and this is due to the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the site and strain through tents and cloth, and do not start again with this, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, for fear the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the place is clean, then come back to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramica aquosa is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white fluid, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, as if it were another egg; and it's the skin of the testicle between the white syphac that we have said; and this does not happen unless one is not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramica is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the groin, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white as water, and it happens often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is a whitish scab as we said, then it's the abscess responding, I will not be long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the groin, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture on the proper cloth, then it's the abscess responding with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the whitish scab, one feels well; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, try to experience all the surrounding quadrature, for which the shape is as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quadrature, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when we cure it with iron, so the patient must be strengthened according to their power and the replenishment of their body; then bind them on their back on something slightly high, and place a great many cloths under them; then sit on their left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two rib bones of the kidney; then take the spatula lying nearby, and cut the skin of the kidneys between the long and the short, until it reaches the nail, and make your incision entirely straight as you cut through the skin of the kidneys up to where it becomes white, and scrape out the fat subtlety according to their power; then pierce the white part with water into a large perforation, and extract all the water, and then place one's fingers on top; and do not touch the kidney but only the white part; cut the entire or in pieces similarly the edge of it subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return; and if the urine jumps out at your work, then bind it back to its place when you have completed the work on the skin; then assemble the two halves of the kidney's rib bones with a seam, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you lift up the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the corruption of blood; then cut off the testicle to all the suspended part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the swelling is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two threads; so cut the other part as you have done the first one equally, then stop the bleeding, and put a moist cloth on the wound soaked in rose oil; and put another moist cloth in wine and oil, and put it above both bones, and put above double cloths, and tie everything together with all the threads that are according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and put them in wool according to this appearance, and be assembled by sewing in the belt of the braies, and one of the keys takes on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the finger; and the other two heads above the two angles, and be all assembled into a restraint in the buckle of the braier; and sometimes this thread is medicine for the cautery instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one cautery cultural subtle, and cut the skin of the bones, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scab that contains the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that scab at intervals, and scrape off with a hot subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cauterized area in all ways that you can, until you have reached everything; and be sure that the fire does not touch the yolk; and know that this work is more safe; and be careful of dismemberment of blood, and more so of the works of cutting; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess or dismemberment of blood or other thing, take care of what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horrible nature, then perforation should be performed, as I am telling you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that a poultice is good, make the patient sit on a light siege; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spacious area, and make the perforation long along the length of the body; and let the wound be wide so that all the water can flow forth; then put cotton on the site, bind it, and let the remaining water drain forth, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow water to issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary for you to insert a needle or instrument used for draining the fluid of dropsies, by which the form is as before; and enlarge the poultice on the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will the patient pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the cones
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this treatise there are many fears and dispositions, which seems to me that much is gained by leaving it as it is; and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the cones; and this is by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known by excessive bitter and ague, which spreads to the groin, or through percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and it does not find pain, and is a grievous abscess; and perhaps there are some grievous abscesses that are pus-filled and stone-like, with a foul color, and sometimes comes from the back of an artery, or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from the back of an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of abscess, when you press it at your elbow; and it does not behoove that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil who is made of vein swelling is known by its disposition to the expression of finger touching, and can well perform the procedure on this similarity, and on other limbs; and that you make a cut in the key of knuckles, then lift the yolk up high, and tie it with white silk thread, and deliver the suspensory all around the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the yolk is already swollen with these veins, then it's necessary that you tie the yolk and make a cut; and if it's air-filled or inside the vessels, then it's necessary that you deliver all that tension and make another cut.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the vein is in the lower part, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and draw out the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, then dress the wound with damp wool cloth in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other cares until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the cones
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a berry, with the softening of knuckles, and the patient's pain increases when it moves; and the treatment for this disease is just as frightening as the previous one, and although we will tell you how to do it according to what the old people did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu'il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l'estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l'autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l'un des coions; car par ceu n'i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l'incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.
de la routure dou syfac	of the corruption of the scab
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est by the section that comes out of the sycamore, or extension above the belly in the part of the kidneys, because of which the intestines descend from that rutting to one of the groin; and this rutting is either from the sycamore or from the extension of it, and these two ways of causing come: either by percussion, or leap, or bray, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the sycamore are that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal all the way down to the bottom, because the sycamore presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses have diverse appearances, just below the skin, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being overcome by the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at times the ulcers go down to the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, where there is fear, therefore one must take precautions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to insert the intestine into his hand within the wound, if it can be inserted; then place a compress on his neck between your hands and lift up the buttocks; then set the key above and cut off all the skin from the groin down to the anus; then put inside the leaves of the size needed according to what you need to open the wound, so that the breath may come out; then scrape off the sycamore that is under the skin of the groin, until the white sycamore is uncovered from all sides; then put your two fingers in where the groin is, between the white sycamore which is under the skin of the womb and between the second sycamore and depart what is behind the womb, and between the second sycamore; and move with your right hand into the key of the groin, and set the white sycamore high to your left hand, and lift up the womb all along the sycamore towards the size; and command the attendant to stretch the womb upwards, and loose what is behind the ligament; and take care if there is anything wrapped around the intestine or the white sycamore; and if you find anything, put it into the belly below; then take a needle where it has 10 threads made of filaments, and put it in the back part of the sycamore which is after the skin of the groin; after the size, then cut off the threads that appear from the fibers, until there are four threads; then assemble one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the sycamore with a strong ligament of two parts; then wrap the threads around the fibers, and tie them together into two parts, so that no servants who nourish it can enter inside it, lest an abscess comes to harm it; and place the ligament on top according to the first long ligament of the same length, and after these two ligaments leave the sycamore which is under the skin of the groin a distance of one finger's breadth; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the groin, until the surface comes out, and the bowels move as we have said before; then apply moistened wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and apply the ligament which we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes it is necessary to cautery the white hard syphilis that we have said, after incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Car this happens often, and let it stay until it chooses for itself; and if it tarries in falling, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls; then cure the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is done just like the thread which is wound around the beam, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and slightly below; then cut into it in half, and cure the abscess of those who work, until the vessels fall; and then cure it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a routure comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens up the abscess; and no parts of the intestines descend to the scrotum, but if they do, it is only slightly, and repair all hours; and although this may seem a long time, if the patient remains in this position, the wound or syphac will grow worse until the intestine descends; and this happens because of the extension of the syphac which is in the groin, as we have said, for it stretches, then softens and swells the abscess and opens it up; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes a cure is made with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies comfortably on his back between your hands, then cut the abscess of the swollen routure from wide according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is below the skin that follows, then take the rod and place it on top of the apparent abscess of the syphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent abscesses of the syphac above the head of the rod, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the rod, and do not touch the syphac or stretch it in any way, just as I have shown you in the cure of the thread of the intestines; then cure it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you set bones, so unbind and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this wound, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the contents inside are softened, and it is visible; and when one wants to cure it, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see fit, cut off the excess of the soft skin at 3 or 4 seams; then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until he is healed, and the thread falls.
dou chastrement	The punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisements are ordained in our law, and for this reason I would have liked not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary because of two manners: one of which is that the mirrors respond with knowledge when asked about a cure; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and goats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisements are done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the sinews are softened and relaxed; then take them into your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: instruct to temper the animal, and press the hide of the testicles into your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and clip on each testicle with a single snip, when you have well scrotumized them; and leave any small pieces double-layered sac and thin sac which is over the vas deferens; and this manner of chastening is more effective than that which is done through attraction, because at attraction something from the testicles remains by chance, so the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafoide is according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has above the pubic area like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of man and woman is that you bind up the injured limbs all, and treat them just as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the uterus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenegine is an injured limb on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the excess flesh of the tenegine with your hand or with razors, and bind it lightly; and do not go too deeply in, lest bleeding ensue, then treat another wound until it is healed; and there is another wound that occurs at the mouth of the marris, and swells, and by chance bursts forth, and looks like a cow's appearance, and therefore they called it "cow disease" in olden times.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to treat you, as we have said about the temperament, and the treatment so long as it is healed.
de erratique	Of the hare-lipped
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is irregular if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if the pores are small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to be; or it is due to a conjoined humor, or subtle or thick complexion, and is made in the thickness, or in the ribs, or under, or whatever; and it hinders conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the ball.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are nearby appearing, so they wish to be bound or wrapped.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to subtle humor and it is near the two kidneys, then hasten and do thus: place your two thumbs together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then straighten the two kidneys so that the subtle humor be released, and cover the swellings; then take flax, soften it in oil, and put it on the kidney, and make the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot coagulate.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sacrum is hard and thick, so it is necessary that you cover it with a spatula-like thing resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Since the swelling is of flesh birth, then suspend it with a poultice and cover; and have medicines that stay blood, such as aloes, dragon's blood, incense, and together with egg-white; then bring a cloth of linen wide, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus be long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then take care of other cures until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marshes comes flesh-born matter, then it is necessary to cover it in this manner, unless it is an enchanted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enchanted abscess that is in the marshes, one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Varicose veins are openings of veins which are not accustomed to being treated in this way; and when varicose veins are old they become thickened; and we have said in the division the likenesses of these, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thickening, when they are cut very deeply into the skin, and do not perceive the sensation, unless it be the cure by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the skin, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then set the fire as hot as possible, and burn it in its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as balsam and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he is still, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him get windlasses at the back and around the breasts so as not to cause harm; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it there.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess subsides, then care for it with oil of ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a sharp head, so it should be covered as I said before with gallnut; and then take care of it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of apostemes of the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the marriage, such as ulcers and stone-like abscesses and herpetic sores and blisters and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes on the thigh, which is not one of the abscesses that gather pus; and if you wish to know how to work with iron, then look to see if the abscess is warm at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the flesh die as long as the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a siege, and have two small sieges or he reclines, and lie down on his back and assemble his feet to the parts in front of the leg; and be his hips spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good cord; then pass the ball towards the right side, and administer the instrument that works the mouth of the thigh, from which comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being administered, you place the first notch in for knowing the depth of the thigh, so that what enters into the instrument does not come too deep, nor hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the thigh with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause harm; and it is necessary to place the horn of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess opens and it is worked with gentle hands, so it must be covered at the head, or at the spatulate left side. And when the bowstring is empty, then it should be that you put moist tents in rosiny oil, or in green oil that is dry; and place the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the marriage, and place a piece on top of the marriage and on the hairy linen wet in water or in mallow soaks that are cooked. Then cure afterwards two days after anointing happening thus, until it is healed. And sometimes lift off the marriage and the wound by washing with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and long aristologe that are cooked; then return to anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the marriage, then it should be that you beware of cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, and she knows the sign if you see the woman hastening down, and seeking to give birth: then the child hastens to come out quickly; then know that this childbirth is according to natural shape, and the issue is under its chief, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly, so that the child comes out soon; because when it descends above its chief, the secondine is with it, and the menses of her superfluities are cleansed by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes to her feet, or above the chest or head, or hands; and it comes onto her belly or so forth; and is turned by chance onto her neck, and by other bad shapes; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out above his head in natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife a small spatula-shaped instrument, as shown here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	et fende la secondine, and cut the afterbirth, and cope a son ungle until the moistors which are inside come forth; and take the womb of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with a mixture of fenugrec and sesame oil; then make her take condiments and have her starve for an hour: she will now bring forth the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out too far, it is necessary that you gently pull them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then dismount the stool on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the blade of the knife that is placed before, and extract the child, and pull back evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the exit of the child upon his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto his feet, then it is necessary to push upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it be even; then take hold of the foot and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can he jump just to the thighs, if it is commanded to bend, and make him stretch with condiments; if he jumps far, as God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not too far as we have said, then turn it a little bit and a little bit until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily fixed.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it doesn't come far as we have said, then take muscillaige from aloet, and oil of silymarin, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and under this ointment, then make her sit in cold water down to below the ribs; and when she is moistened below, then make the mirror-colored plaster, and put it underneath, and let it stay an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child from its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then put your hands on it small by small; then be smooth on its neck, and let the feet hang down below, and sit up above the bed; and fold your hands small by small, and then take hold of the hands over the belly, and remove the cushions underneath until it is prepared below; and if the child does not cry out, then take its feet and shape it properly, then move the belly upwards, then put in your hands; and thus calm down the child small by small; and command the woman to take hold until the child comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes forth with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and go; if she cannot go, make her lie down on the bed, and straighten out her legs properly; then administer the poultice that I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the stool, then study to bring back the hand; and thus calm down the child according to its natural figure, and make it stern, and command the woman to take hold until the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l'ewe legierement;
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner with all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adoncq si istra legierement.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an strange thing, and do not live anymore, if they be not called; I know this, that they multiply, and are divided by the sow that divides them, which is tied to the mouth; and sometimes they come out naturally like all sorts.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come forth, if the cure is done as we have said, and there are subtle remedies, and make quickly and lightly what it makes; and do so as it is worth for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, and are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the healer knows all this, for similar things happen by chance; so do as it is needed.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the deceased or aborted child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to manual labor; it is necessary that you know whether the woman has sound virtue, and whether she has an accident or fears death; it is necessary that the woman be seated on her back, and have her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister take two parts of this mixture, or tie it to the bed so that she is not troubled by the descent of the child; then wipe the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with muskseed, althea, and fenugreek, and linseed oil; then anoint your hands with these oils and mixtures; then pour them lightly into the mother; then take one of those leaves that are suitable for this purpose, and pay attention if the child appears to be descending on his head; then place the leaf in her eyes or in her neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs; and if the descent is on the feet, pinch or prick it at the sides; and it is necessary that you hold the leaf in your right hand, put the cord between the fingers of your left hand, and pour the mixture all over your hand lightly, and place the leaf in one of those places we have said, until it comes to an empty thing; and this is the form of the leaf:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then fix it facing the other once again, or if you have need of three, so that the extractions are even; and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, for movement to issue, and let the onuses be dentate for movement to hold, as is its form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, then anoint the ball with some of its two oils and put it in that part, and pull the other part; and if none remains, then place this onus higher up and do so until all comes forth.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be returned due to constriction, then it is necessary that you wrap around above the fold, until all issues; then cut at the joint of the heel or the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu peux; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	Et s'il est étranglé au ventre ou au pis, si convient que tu le soulèves à l'enveloppeau sur la main; et font le ventre ou le pis, tant que les moissors qui y sont courus; et si les autres membres sont osseux, et le chief demeure, si boutte la baillie sa main en profond de la marris, et le traite jusque à la bouche de la marris; puis i boutte I ou II, et le traite foure; et si la bouche de la marris est rétrécie par apostème chaud qui y est venu, si n'y convient mie travailler, ains convient aménistrer choses moistes et grasses; et l'aménistre emploie pâtes, et siece en eau molleuses et amoissant.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side on the chest, and you can put it equal, so amputate what we have said in a living child; and if one cannot do that, then cut it up by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	When you have done this, instruct the patient with what we have said about abscesses that come to the marriage; and if bleeding occurs, it should be washed in cold water restraining, and instruct the patient with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had a dead child in her womb, then she consulted another doctor on that one, and the other doctor refused to treat the dead child.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her backside and swelled up to the point where it opened, and began with great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied ointment with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I sought the wound and made it into many bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived long thus, and sometimes there would be a small amount of pus coming out; and I do not recall this chapter more than that because, when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, with which we bind books; and to the second turning to the two heads of the two links.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictive, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be about two palms wide, and the edge of the trees one palm and a half long; and between the two are two joinings of this same wood, which are tightened on both sides, to a length of half a palm or a little more; and these two joinings are inserted into the mouth of the marriage bed to open when you turn the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made to its likeness more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebene or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pincers; and it should have two handles, as you see, one palm long and two wide; and when you see opening the mouth with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on it, her feet pendant and her legs open, then put the two handles together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the instrument, until the ball makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted, and their shapes are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then the work is faster, and higher for men according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then have her exhale slowly, and keep your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for that reason, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, I take a poultice, and make a hole or coverlet, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked in water on the fire; then I put a cloth or poultice on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow, and tie it so that the vapors come inside the marrow; then make it burst forth, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure and is not fully healed, command the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or althea ointment, and then put it in its natural state, and take a second bath; and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not resist extraction; but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull; and it will come forth and settle.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Et if the mouth of the marris is narrowed, we have said the remedy for blowing and fumigation of herbs; and if it is none of what we have said, then beware that you do not proceed by pulling; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marris, you tie to the cleft of the woman, then anoint with ointment quadrifarmacous; so she will be purged and restored, and will come forth; but nevertheless, when she has purged thus, a foul odor comes up in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary then to do fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have proven that fumigation with cress and dried figs works.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it appears like a cord, and one puts the head in a subtle way into nature, and the joints wide above the fire; and be the fumigations above the coals, and the lice so long as they are wasted, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane at its due time, and not pierce at all with a sharp instrument, and secure the cord so it does not touch; then put on a moist cloth in wine and oil, and then the remedy of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put on a thread of flax, and let it stay for days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that swelling: then be cured, as we have said with the thread of flax.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules which come from under the fundament are nodation, and grow more than those which come from above the fundament to go away, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture with white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas persist; and they are known by this: either it bursts or gushes out or blows over when the patient has an emission, and by chance jumps up a little.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it has fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the junction of the thigh, and just not to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula is persistent at the fundament and does not persist; and it is that you put your thumb or fundament into the fistula, and insert a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, then you put in a thin piece of cloth or horsehair, as far as you can feel it with your finger; and if you do not feel it and there is no emission or blowing or bleeding, as we have said: know that it will not open; and hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or all the way to the urethral conduit, if it urinates and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If she is pierced just to the jointure of the cleft, so then the tenon comes to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around, it is that he will stay thus below, and nothing is worth medicine or plaster by ointment; and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish mirrors who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his clefts, and have his clefts inclined towards his belly; then put a tent of clay, or of plank if there is tortuosity, until you know when the tenon comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your two fingers there, if sense then the tenon has pierced; and be discovered where you feel between your thumb and the flesh or fat, then you know she is Persian; if not worked on, one cannot heal her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; and the aid that one makes there, is to scorch the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; and plug it all hot in the fistula, until it reaches the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred things are burned, which are like a feather of an owl; and then cure with moist tents in butter, until those charred things are gone, then anoint with oil, removing char and sewing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that is not healed otherwise; and if the tent enters, and does not pierce to the point that is at the foundation, and there is between your skin and the tent a thick covering of char or of sacs, and you see the fistula at the edge of the covering from which it proceeds; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and plug it again before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and will fall; then remove those charred things that resemble a feather of an owl, and none shall remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine quickly.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the fire cauteries assemble two things: that is to say, the burning of these joints joined together, and the congealing of blood and the drying up of moisture; then the cure of wet tents in butter or in chopped herbs, until the wound gushes forth, and the charred bone issues into the bow; then cure the sore of ointments swelling hard flesh, and are the medicines dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes all the way down to the fundament, and is separated from the body, then put your two fingers on the fundament, and explore that part.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent, and between two is the cloth or the sac or bone, where it is near to piercing, if there are no fires except by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of three ways: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you scrape right down to the bottom, or if you can put in tents and cure as before; and don't go too deep on the surface, lest you uncover the foundation which holds the tenement together, and bring forth eliminations without intention; then cure it as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and mind the bone that is lacking in the wound, as long as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula away from the part outside the foundation: if there is no easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above, so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all around the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then take the thread from that perforation, so that you push your tent or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two pieces together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two; and then restrain it sometimes, until the filaments between them come undone, and discharge; then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it's not fitting to make a cut that is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spine of the spatumile is very rough and irregular on one side and smooth on the other, because it does not break off where it should not break off, as you see here.
des emorroydes	bleedings
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like grain of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in court afterwards blood comes out, and one or more, and are outside the foundation and at the chief of the foundation; but those who are outside have little moisture, and in court afterwards a little yellow water or a little blood comes out, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to strain by lying in chambers, until the foundations give way, and it becomes clear where the sons are; then hasten and take hold with pincers, or hold it at your finger, and cut off at its roots; and if the linen cannot retain them due to their moisture, take them on a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camlet; and extract them at your hands, then cut them, and powder them on some hot powders that are in place for cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, and care for other cures until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot come out, then enema the patient with biting and harsh cleanser to wash what is within the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patients are seized, and the sons are free from the foundation, the cure is light; and it is that you take hold at your finger or with pincers, and cut off, then care for as we have said, until they are healed, and fear incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the scorching of the devil or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that scorching of the devil occurs in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is useless.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to scrape at the point of a spatula or on one's own nail surface above, which does not allow it to become moist; then care for it until it is solid as needed; and if it cannot solidify, then re-scrape more strongly than before, until it heals somewhat, and is scraped away; then care for it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the shivering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The formication is a small defect lacking before the body, and goes quite deep; and once it freezes, one feels it just like a dead numbness, and it comes to all parts of the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a goose feather or a strong turkey feather, and place it on the numbness, until the circles of purple color cover the numbness entirely; then turn your hand around the entire cane as much as you can surround the numbness, and push it in deep, and tear out the numbness from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is necessary to do so with an iron or steel wire according to this form, and be subtle underneath and drawing upwards.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor pierce, but keep it at the point of your finger, and press hard And if you see that, then cauterize the furuncle, as is written or described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the purge
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or archaut, or melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to how they are prepared for use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then that are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the purge, whether small or great, is as follows: the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it has an obstruction where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and it has two small holes on one side and one on the other; and the belly or womb receives medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with many small holes, and there is one space between each hole, then pour into these holes one thread of strong linen yarn twisted ten times or more around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then purge; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purge with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then put it in gently; then have the ministers squeeze it together with both hands until it is all done, then remove the purge, and lift up the patient's legs to the appearance, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it be held for as long as it can; and if they sleep a whole night after, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purge him in a disease of gut obstruction, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, so too be the clisters as subtle as for a child; and it is the form of the subtle clisters above which the skin should be strained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the section on wounds: now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where they are made, and according to how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by hitting with stone, and cutting with sword, knife, or lance, or staff, or arrow, or similar things; or those that are done according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or breast, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from hitting with stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn apart and the wound is great, and you doubt lightly of abscess growing hot: so make it heal immediately on the cephalic side, especially if it's bleeding much from the wound, and be the healing contrary to the injured part; and relieve the patient with replenishment of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et s'il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with suturing, just as I will say for wounds of the belly, by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeds, and only holds together by a small amount, then close it; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of soft skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as roasted testicles and cooked wheat, also like poults, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a putrid or rotting skin wound, and it is not touching the bone, then cut off all the rotten flesh, and wash it clean, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stemmed without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie the artery; and if it does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put in this powder which hardens even when the abscess has been moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and grind it finely, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its own blood; then tie it well, and let it be without releasing it, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does this only with coal alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the abscess has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the boil has changed the wound, whether it is in its place or not, do not put this powder there; but put some digestive oils, or poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it drips pus; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then do not apply any restraining thing, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the medicine soft, as a child bathed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed again in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	Et si les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look at whether there are signs of festering beneath the wound that the patient complains of: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it tightly to keep the blood from flowing too deeply and reviving in the heart, and killing the patient; but put a attracting ointment on it, and bind it twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck up the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then the spasms won't come, nor will there be tremors of the heart or other strange movements of the entrails; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat then the tents and other wounds until he is healed; and if it cannot heal, and work, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut of sword or knife and it is simple, or worse, on the chest or back, then treat what is in front; if it is large, by sewing; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone and there are broken pieces, then close the wound, and bind it with bandages if they are torn; and if they are not torn, let the wound heal, which will ease extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are great and middle-sized and small; from a great wound sometimes some intestine or intestines spring forth, through which there is an obstruction to their passage; and sewing is more difficult, and at times the small wound is worse than the great one, because on that account one puts more stitches into the intestines, so as not to put them in suddenly; for the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, then return more slowly, and for that reason the middle-sized wound is best, because one returns the intestine to its place as with other two. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four manners: the two common stitches happen in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds; and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the wound is small and nothing from the intestines has flowed out, and it seems to be easy to repair, this can happen by one of two methods: or because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with lukewarm water only, or cook it in hot water mixed with cypress, spikenard, and spurge, and apply the intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes make it reappear, and it is more useful for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or decoctions of malves and spikenard are cooked, because by this means the entry is freed from a small amount of thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a slight incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut off hemorrhoids; and the first cure is more useful than cutting, that no one should cut without great necessity being present; and that's the instrument for cutting: if you cut inside the curve and do not cut too much, and look at this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump forth, so set it right according to natural form in its proper place, if you have power, for this counts motions.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, so you should make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, so put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and similarly if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, set your attention to that which the wounded part is higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say in great wounds and hurts.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Put small dressings on the wound, then take a pitous minister who holds all the rupture in their hand and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you take one or more needles, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave a space of about two fingers at the head of the wound and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the siphac which is underneath the skin on the inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part and assemble the four edges of the siphac together; then strain a double thread around the needle for about two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound in order, and then leave a space of about two fingers and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to your need of needles until all the wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot well enter: therefore it should be moderate; and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the healing; then cut the edges of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient at night, and put tent or drapes on the edges of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for one needle or two are enough; the second stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the siphac together on a needle with a strong middle thread; and when you have pierced all these edges, then remove the needle from the part where you started in the manner one sews cloth; and leave a space of about the thickness of a lesser finger between each stitching, this stitching is used by men, and I stitched a wound that had been opened with a knife on an old man's belly, which was over a palm in width, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines when they had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was closed after 15 days, and I healed it, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not heal him with oil, because I was in a place where there wasn't any, nor any medicine; and I put two pieces of old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and put it through from the outer part to the inner one; when it has pierced the core straight on, so place the suture or thread where you have put the needle, and make it pierce again from the other side of the inner part to the outer one; and the intention of this stitching is that you sew as tailors do their pelts, and leave once the suture on one side and then take it up on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, which Galen says is proper, is as follows: some make two parts come together naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this way: insert a needle or the end of the mirror nearby, and let it pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part all the way through to the inner part, at the two ends of the suture; then make one and the other of the outer part go through to the inner part in two other holes of the mirror that are on the other side; and this is the lesser manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this and others witness it, so one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in it; and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather; and know that when a wound is on the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than at other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: and that is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has been moved by the heat, so remove the intestine and the fat; then put on powder mixed with charcoal, and if the heat has moved it, so apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and tie the thread, and bind the stitches, and the bandages; then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, then put on, soon as it begins to dry out, a cloth, old and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine except in certain dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will not cause community of members to the main ones, it is necessary that you put light wool cloth in oil of temperate heat or in rose oil, and wrap it around the gashes, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or rotting in bowels, and many times happens, then cleanse with black vinegar wine, and especially if the rotting comes up to the intestine; and pierce inside, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the withering of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approaching nature of its substance to those of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the girdle jumps out of the wound, then put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become white or black, then you must tie the part that is black, lest blood does not cease to flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the bond, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound until the girdle falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that a man was wounded by a lance in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became swollen and turned into a fistula, and from it came the excretion and flatulence; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to apply subtlety until he was healed, and the parts were sewn.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him stitched, I doubted that the patient had harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take figs on large stones, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the figs have opened the mouth, put them on both lips so that they strangle their mouth on; and then cut off his head, and it stays so that he cannot untie, then place another fig afterwards in this manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	The chief of the intestine is thus dried out in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that has been cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of this thread from the intestine that is very desiccated, and then tie a subtle linen thread around it, then push the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine closed, and let it remain in the natural state; and this manner of stitching with figs is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is no reason or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	All wounds or abscesses, when they ulcerate, are called universally "fistula", and similarly when they become hollow and flow downwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation, hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hollow like a bird's feather; and sometimes it flows freely downward, and other times thickly; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is only through one of the nine causes: namely, through the smallness of blood or body; or through malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or the skin is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property of the region is slow in digestion, and slow in healing, and flows through nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Saiches that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for it is there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the syphilitic, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and so too does it come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grave sanitation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if any fistula does not come just to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, then take a linen or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, so that it will close; and if the fistula is crooked, search for a subtle linen tent made of cloth, because cloth bends around tortuousness; and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because moisture flows quickly from one perforation to another, and purifies; then bleed as much as you can, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and carefully cut away everything that is in front, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and where it is; and when you truly know where it is, whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in some of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the bad matter and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then cure as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is well closed at the right spot, then it is necessary to cut away everything in front, as much as you can, then put moist tents of medicine in place, and pour them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put oil ointments on healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If vein or nerves do not harm the principal members, as we said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so make the king sit until all the corruption is gone, then treat the wound of things that are rotten to the core until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns to its former state, know that you have not yet reached the bottom: uncover and search thoroughly until you reach the depths, and remove all corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep in the bone, that you cannot approach it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature; and if there is a little rotten bone, and you can extract it with pincers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, then extract all of them, leaving none behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and open and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place a thing with putting forth and let it stay until the pus is formed around the bones, and then they will have easier access to the bones; and if this is a large bone, such as that of the leg or thigh, then wait only until the corruption is all purged away, then repair the wound; and if there is great part of the corrupted thing, and it comes just to the edge of the bone; so you must cover and seal it up to the edge of the corruption, and then cure it until it is bound together; and I will tell you about a boil that happened to a man on his leg, which will give you example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was about thirty young men who had a pain in their leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came to the leg and became a large abscess, and there was no way to open it; but the doctors, through their foolishness, worked so much on it that the abscess opened, and many matters flowed out, and became a fistula, and there were many ulcers that all gave rise to foul smell and moisture from the body; and many doctors took care of him for two years, and there was no skill in the art of medicine, until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines he was being treated with, and what flowed out through the ulcers to great extent; and the young man's body became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent on one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came right up to the bone inside; I saw what appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed; and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but could not heal; then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and doubted whether to sew up the place; but I did not dare until I had cut around a palm's length of the bone, and brought it back to its full thickness, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed quickly, and there was no need to continue the treatment except for the patient's weakness, which could not endure, and due to the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the blood evacuation it often happened that he was often sick, but he became entirely healthy, and instead of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he had good disposition and suffered no harm or contrary from anything at all, neither when coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken somewhere in the body, then it should be treated in this manner: take a linen and strain it at the top of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards; and put another thicker linen over the first one, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you want to see, so that the flesh does not bleed; and place a hot iron or a wooden spatula under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it should be treated as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and treated again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then put hot iron under, and then cut away the corruption from one part to another, and be sure that the cord of the long part of the corruption comes off, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the jointure, then cut the corrupted jointure, and remove the bone or what contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other way than to cut through; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the foot, it is very strong that thing, but all the same you must inquire about this corrosion, how it presents itself to you; and cleanse it in all the ways you can, without letting the vein or nerve hinder you; know that the file and the tools for cutting these bones are many, according to the nature of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; and when you have medicine that cures this corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member until it reaches the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes either by death or by the greater malice which is the deficiency of the member; and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they had been burned by fire, and after that blackness, the corrosion spreads from member to member, and takes all over the body; thus hasten to cover it up, and if this corruption is in the head of the joint, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it off at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the amount of his virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, then cut the whole foot; and if it mounts up the leg, then cut at the knee joint; and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister's thread down and another thread up, and you loosen the flesh between the two threads a little wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or sew, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the seam does not touch the healthy part, and brings the patient another lesion and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le lieu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restrictives; puis revien à ta médecine tant qu’elle soit accomplie, puis lie le membre navré d’un lien convenable, et le cure tant qu’il soit saigné; et je te conterai ki'il avint à l'homme en son pied: il li avint une noirure qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corruption vint premier en son doigt du pied, tant qu’elle prist tout le pied; et quant l'homme vit la corruption, si se hâtea de couper le pied, et fut saigné; et longtemps après li revint la corruption ou doigt de la main, et il vint à moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives après la mundification du corps, et ne put cesser les corruptions; et il vout que je lui coupasse la main, et je ne vou, que j'avais espérance de répercuter la matière; et doutai aussi que si je taille sa main, qu'il ne mourut, car les vertus de l'homme estoient faibles; et il se désespéra tout, et revint en sa terre, et se hâtea de couper sa main, et fut saigné; et je n'ai ceu contefait faux que pour cela qu'on fait autrefois, s'il en a besoin.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, and demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et si tu as foi que le cuir s'aigre, et la corruption n'est pas en profondeur, et le cuir est épais de char, alors cure-le avec un clistère ainsi: regarde si les seins sont grands, et la bosse qui en est est de puante odeur, alors clistérisez-la avec une médecine égyptienne faite ainsi: prenez ail, huile, et litargire, également, mettez-le cuire dans un vassel au feu, jusqu'à ce que la médicine soit rouge, et devienne aussi épaisse que le miel; et puis prends-en selon ta nécessité, et fais-en une potion en eau et en miel, et clistérise le sein, et contrains-le pertus; et laisse-la médicine ainsi par II heures, puis la tire-en espreignant; fais-ce mainte fois, jusqu'à ce que les seins soient nettoyés, et que soit ôtée la puanteur; et quelques fois clistérisez avec de l'eau de cendres, quant cette médicine n'est pas présente, et est que tu prends des cendres de fust de vigne, et jette de l'eau dessus, puis la coule, et en fait une potion, jusqu'à ce que tu saches que les seins sont bien nettoyés; et si le malade ne peut souffrir, ni la médicine égyptienne ni l'eau de cendres, alors clistérisez avec de l'eau et de miel, ou il a un peu de litargire broyé; ou tu fais une potion de miel et de vin meillet, que le miel ait propriété de nettoyer et de laver, et que le vin fasse adorer le sein; et quant tu as fait cela, et tu as foi que les seins sont bien nettoyés, alors clistérisez avec ce qui fait naître chair dans lui, et est que tu prends de l'emphaluste définitif, et le fais avec de l'huile rosette et en vin; ou tu fais une potion d'autres médicines et de guerignons, dont j'ai dit les propriétés ou traité des guerignons; et si la plaie du sein est petite, et que la cuirasse du clistère ne peut y entrer, alors eslargis-la d'un fer un peu, et mettez-y une tente de l'oignement égyptien, ou oignement basilicon, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit eslargi; et si la plaie est trop large, alors laisse-la ainsi que le cuir ou le clistère puisse entrer, et si la plaie qui gît boue est au-dessus, alors coupe-le ou plus bas que c'est.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bow is in its deepest position, do not let it wander flesh; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you see, prepare it in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest place it can be, because when the bow is at its deepest position, do not let it wander flesh and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you see, prepare it in this manner: so the bow moves slightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and lay a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then open up the forces in the same place where the pustule of the breast is more wide than before, then anoint it with a soothing oil on another cloth according to the size of the pustule, and put it on the pustule of the breast to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the pustule of the breast removes often to remove the bow, and know what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digested or indigested; and take heed if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in this manner and you see the nature that springs up on the pustule of the breast, know that the breasts are already set free, and approach health; and then release it in the morning, or the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the anointing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast drains undigested pus after many days, know that the breast is not cleared.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for the healers approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are men who slowly fill their wounds with fat and those who do the opposite; and if indigestive bile jumps from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing; and if the breasts take long to heal and are distant, then mix medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as defined by ointment, because there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment defined and make it with rose oil and equal parts of old wine; then cook it and use it; and do the same for honey cooked with growth, when ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is over the fire; then glue the cloth to the breast, and sometimes administer an aromatic long and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like wheat of veils and centaury; and use simple or composite ones: grind them and make powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the treatment is prolonged and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; so treat the fistula according to what we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is a boil that grows under the fold of the armpit of the hand or foot, or by chance occurs in other places; and when it is old and one does not take care, so it becomes a bad boil, and runs and flows so much that it cuts out the root of the boil, and by chance all; and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, so great pain comes, and are the joints of the toe wide, and is the color flushed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you care for it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, then you must cut away all the surplus flesh that remains of the boil, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the boil is sound; and if the boil presses on the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, then it is necessary that you put a dressing under the boil which pricks the flesh, and tie it up above, and cut away that subtle flesh quietly and lightly, and put hot and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and remove it, for as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint corrupting, then cut it out from here just as was said before, then cure it until it is sound again; and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first make it well; then cut the ulcers in the spatula-shaped knife cutting across above, and be careful that the edge does not come all the way to the flesh which is below the ulcer, for the patient would feel too great pain; and if there is any pus, put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The knots that are born in the hands of some people by chance are entirely fleshly, and by chance there is one or it has bones, and sometimes one is born at the root of the joint, or birth is in some of the joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil who is born in any night of the year does not move, and he who is born at the jointure of the yew tree, by chance moves; the stature of one who is fair-skinned is light, in such a manner: it is so in his root of a large spindle.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one that occurs in the root of the joint is hard to cure: if you are hesitant to cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or should be at the last night, it is necessary that you scrape first the skin around to the bone, then scrape the bone with a suitable thread for this, then cure it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come together must be gathered from birth, or from a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you scrape the solder, so that it repairs according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or put between two thin pieces of lead, until the bone is solid, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to any of his hands with the palm, then cut that swelling as it should be.
des vils	of evils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Swollen veins are large and distended, full of superfluous melancholic substances, which come to many members of the body; and it occurs more often in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer to him sometimes purging of bile, and then the medicine of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut it and remove all the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and remove everything.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is according to this manner: first, take the leg of a hot water kettle very strong, until the black blood is made subtle, then restrain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then lift it and remove all the black blood as far as you can, from one end to the other, until as much blood is removed as the patient's constitution can endure; and then tie it up, and command that he abstain from eating meat, drinking black wine; and begin again the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and it is good for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: Raise the patient's leg if it has many hairs, then put it in water and let it soak until it turns red and the veins are inflamed; and if you don't have water, heat it over fire and then scrape off the skin around the vein at the long part of the knee or below the ankle; then cut the skin to the size of an inch and scrape off the vein on each side until you feel it; and you will see it red and black, like a white cord when it enters the skin; then put the rest down as low as possible so that it is lifted out of the skin, and then lift it up lightly, then cut in another place three times; then scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up to the original height, just as you did before; then cut another size or more if needed, then lift it up and cut at the heel of the foot, then pull and lift just to the second size; then pull it from size to size, until it is completely freed, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift it, put a needle on all thick double threads and lift and pull, putting it under the rest and turning your hand this way and that until it comes out; and beware not to cut it, for if you do, you cannot pull or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient; and when you have pulled it all, put a wet linen cloth on the wound in vinegar and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is constricted and twisted and wrapped together all at once, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it unevenly, but do not cover it up; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye is curved, and does not cut off, so that it opens up the vein; and it is thickly curved, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is placed in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or tree, and on earth where there is no moisture; and it happens to occur in another part than in the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from beneath the skin, as it does inside the body with serpents and worms, placed between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this flux are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the swelling changes color and the flux begins to come out, just like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two feet, tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it stops draining at the back, you wrap around the cloth again, and tie; and if it's too long, cut off part of it, wrap the remaining, and don't cut it in its root until it is completely drained out; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and bring forth abscesses and putrefaction at that place, and a bad disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated gradually up to the end, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this flux occurs when it has been drained out to five feet long, or ten; one man came to me once whose was ten feet long, and when you cut it, it bursts into one or two boils, and then drains down to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and the matter inside is emptied out, and afterwards medicines are administered to prevent putrefaction any day, then the cure is performed as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this opening many rainbows appear, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or foot, and there comes a great abundance of pus, and then rainbows come; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Veins that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it pierces the skin where it is going, and jumps out; and it is filled with the putridity of some humors, such as worms, serpents, lice, and ascarides in the belly; and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and moving, there is no one who can do anything except when it moves: so then you must tie the above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut on top and draw it forth, and if the vein is pierced deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire above until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the chief part of the eye, then bind strongly below it a small circle, then cut on top, and draw it forth; and one must use the patient with purifying medicines soluble for bad humors produced, and beware of meats that produce corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and I probed afterwards, the sight ascended as much as a worm on the shoulder, sooner than anything, like very white silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me it was rotating around the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had thought that it would be good for the pain to move from one place to another, but I did not want it to, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought to myself that it was because the woman's body is too dry, and her veins are uncovered, and therefore that constraint appears; and do not pay attention according to this reason to those who have moist bodies and veins that respond.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then cut above until the ventosities are forced to come out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat with those who calm ventosities, such as fetid pills and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their kinds is that there are those with large points, small ones, hooked ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that falls in any member falls in two ways: either it falls in the principal limb, such as head, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, warns you: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not warn you, and the arrow is not at all gone deep, then heal it, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps over the skull which is above the brain, is when there is numbness and darkness and distortion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes this happens without fever of nose or ears; and sometimes it affects speech and voice; and a white moist pustule jumps out like boils, and also as if burned by fire; and if this sign warns you, then take care of the cure, and extract the arrow if it is not too deep.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow also moves like the hairs, and with cold black blood, and comes with chilliness and cold sweat, and faintness: know then without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow when the kidney is hit is that without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the breastbone, it is near the little ribs; and vomits a great deal of yellow bile and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow strikes the stomach by chance, so that something from the undigested meat falls out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow strikes the belly, and a piece of bowstring jumps out through the intestines without any hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow strikes the bladder, and urine jumps out and flows forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and shoulders and throat and shoulder blade and armrest and spine of the back and forehead and hips and thighs and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the neck; I tried it and pulled it out from the other side under the fatty part of the ear, and he was healed without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow that had struck him in the fatty part of the eye under the eyebrow bone, and the arrow was bent back, and could not be extracted except for the point next to where it was, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, so that anyone could see it without needing to look closely; the game was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab to the ears: I saw the bearded ones, and refined it so much that I drew it out, and the Christian became well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And extract an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die; and then after XXX days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and guided it, and drew it out, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if the arrow falls on the back of a man, and the wound is sewn up above; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural dispositions, nor finds harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and it remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow wound in the man of the princes the king, which had been shot into his left side, and was slightly declining to the right part; and the arrow was entirely covered. I was called to the treatment after it had been shot three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I searched for it with all subtlety and didn't find it; and he felt puncturing and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I placed on the wound a plaster attracting and digestive, because the swelling didn't develop; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the plaster many days, and the wound healed above, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his flesh; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied medicine with corrosive properties to the wound by hand for several days, until it was open, and I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead which had been embedded at the site; then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that medicine, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it did well beyond 4 months, and then healed to such a point that I put in forceps, and manipulated it from one side and the other, and could not come out; then I did not stop subtlety and ingenuity with instruments, until I took out the wound well done, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I held on and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or it is said the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything; but wise and experienced masters can well enough grasp a small matter, and on what is present and failing, find new work and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not arise from members where they are inserted except by two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which jumps out on the other side is an entering arrow into flesh, and sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump out now, so let it stay until the flesh is around it, and the issue is alleviated; and likewise if it's inserted in bone, and can't come out, so leave it thus for some days, and gently move each day; and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't, so make a small incision all around, until the skin around it is stretched, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Et if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the vents of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes equal after a few days, because if the arrow comes close to the skull, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come close to the skull, and the patient remains some days without bad accident, then the doctor should guide the extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck and cannot come out further, then administer theriacs around, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the tent; and if you find it, extract it with some suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, cut away until the wound is large; and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears where it holds fast, remove the flesh that is stuck for two parts as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can pull it out; and be subtle in not breaking the arrow, lest you would draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then follow what we said in its chapter about treatment; and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and make a plan how to draw out the arrow without danger, whether soon or late, firmly or gently; and put the patient as he was when the arrow hit him, for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then do according to what the sign shows.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another side, or if it shows something from there, or the skin is swollen in such a place as to be seen or felt uncomfortably: cut then above, until forceps can take hold, and then pull out: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, as far as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and start the extraction again until it comes out: and if there is pus from the arrow, then cover all of it; and if the pus bursts forth, and you must administer treatment, then provide an instrument with a toothed edge, so that the point of the arrow goes into the teeth of the instrument; and then push forward, and if the arrow is extracted, then insert the instrument with its toothed edge entering inside to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as is proper.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can cut on it, then do so; and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound as necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, small, and petty, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hair's tip is also like the feather of a bird, to push against the point of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps for pushing and for extracting is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one cures oneself, of which there are 16 on the head, to wit: two beats that are after the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of both eyes, which are called "aspirés"; and one vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and one vein that is on the crown of the head; and the two grooves that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips below the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used for bleeding are two in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side, and people call it "the chief's vein"; and the median vein, which is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people call it "the heart's vein"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and people call it "the belly's vein"; and it lies above the elbow, and it is that one used for bleeding, which appears manifestly above the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the wrist and ankle veins, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is under the fold of the armpit on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indicative, and boute la lancette desoz, and lieve la voine en haut, and la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, and faire corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, and met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; and then la lie forment, and la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; and nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding from the cephalic vein in old-fashioned maladies of the face, and in migraine, and in redness; and the qualities are such that the patient strains his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or other thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is sound and not once an hour with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary that the opening be too wide; and the wound to cross, because the bone is pressed, and by chance break the opening when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding from the two veins that are in both arm-pits is helpful to those with fever, and with tinea, and with redness, and with greenish-yellow discharge in the eye, and with maladies of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient strains his neck while twisting by any ligament, just as before; then let it bleed, and be the blood of the travers, a bit long, a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the opening is subtle, by chance it will break; then make an incision of blood, until you have need of it, and then bind on cotton, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the neck vein is so valuable that it can cure a fever, and a sudden fright, and facial diseases such as migraine and flush that comes to the face, and indeed when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient will tighten his throat, then restrain his neck to his left hand, and take a long thin flame, and place it between the upper lip and the nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this way, and the blood will start flowing now, do not go too deep into the fontanelle, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it at night, for it is very quickly restored; and that is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two jugular veins helps with the constriction of the arteries, and the beginning of menstruation, and many diseases, and epilepsy, and corrosion, and herpes, and ulcers; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his throat below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be sitting on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool, then open the long vein a little widely, then take the blood temperamentally, or as much as is necessary; then do the other side in the other vein, then release the tie, and constrict the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the healing of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The vein of the upper lips is helpful to purging in the mouth, and to corrupting of gums, and breaking of lips, and around the navel.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I said; then turn the book, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by having small black lines around them: cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing beneath the tongue is helpful after the cephalic healing, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and looks under each side one black vein: heal then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly used for bleeding are treated in two ways: either by pricking them with a large flinty mirtin, or an olive-colored subtle one as cutters trench, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the wide opening is well-known, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the neck veins that are full of thick blood visible on the surface, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-colored flint.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, or where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach; and it is necessary for the physician to bleed properly, and to be careful of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is cut and blood flows out, it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and one should not prick the flame, but rather incise it like anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you should manipulate it, and change to another one; or you want some rain from it, or you bleed in its place in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cupping glass anesil is empty, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you manipulate the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with an ink, and bind the arm, and cup the vein of the empty glass; and beware that you do not strike at the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it flowing up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: hasten then, and place your elbow long, then take away your elbow if the bleeding subsides, as often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not ceased, and it complains to you, and the remedy is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retires; and cease the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig skin, and cut it, and take one half and tie it well just above the other day; if the bleeding stops, that's good; if not, then cure it with powders that stop blood, as we have said, for the smallness of the wound and the power of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the vein is so helpful that it treats blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deep and finds the nerve, and it swells and the bleeding is hindered, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often appears many times, and if it does not appear in some men due to its subtlety, then you must stop the bleeding with anesthetics; and hide the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is vein between the two nerves, then cut the long piece.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic [region] so helps that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to let blood flow into the olivary or myrtle flame, for it is the most saving of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place and not cause any harm if one has to start over the first time, and then begin again; and in some cases, the places swell in certain men, when one starts over the first time, but does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is necessary only to preserve health and to prevent diseases from coming; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are said to be good: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of autumn or winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one should bleed on the first day or third day after the second hour or third part of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The wound physician who tends to illnesses has no fixed schedule, but rather when need arises by day or night, at all hours and in all times; and it is not necessary to treat children until they are fourteen years old, nor women who are nursing except for the first quarter of a month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one bleed elderly people who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to heal, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary for them to purge their intestines with a gentle enema, if they have many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not absorb superfluous fluids which are harmful to the main members; nor does one recover from illness who is too filled with meat, or drunk, as long as they remain so, nor those afflicted with dropsy; and beware of healing after a colic passion, vomiting, and abdominal decoration, and frequent visits to a woman, labor, watching, and fasting, and all that is contrary to nature, or by the arm or body; then subtlety the humors if the blood is thick, through foods, drinks, and medicines, as long as you have the power; then enter into a bath, unless something prevents it, in order to subtletize the blood, and heal from the opening of the stomach around the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day from labor, pain, luxury, and similar things; and be merry and joyful, and let the healer be higher than the one who is being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times, then loosen the ligament above gently, for when it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow properly; and then rub the area with both hands, until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the healer's thumb with a little old oil, and place their left hand on that vein below the navel, about a finger-width from where they want to heal, so that the vein does not fail and collapse when it is cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car there are veins that flow like strings to the surgeon, and those that are full of windiness, so that when you place the flame on them, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these; and if you open the vein, the wound will be too narrow, therefore it is necessary for the surgeons to be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at first time, that is good; if not, then it starts again a little below or above quickly, as long as the swelling is not present.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the swelling is puffed up, and the patient is frightened, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bind his arm: by chance an abscess will form; don't enter into the bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the bleeding is subtle, and you doubt that there won't be as much blood as you see, then trust in that same wound itself to let out all the flame properly; and work quickly, while the swelling is puffed up; for this has happened many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swollen, then do not resume bleeding, and put a little bit of linseed oil on it, because it lightens the body's blood, and makes the wound that the oil touches; and thus administer the linseed oil to each bleeding vein that you stop the veins, in order to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing works for triple and double wounds, when one puts it on the limb; then subtlety seeps out and spreads quickly when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not fully drained except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put a moist sponge on the limb in warm water and a little hot vinegar, and hold it for an hour; and you should do this after the bleeding stops from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after some days with any blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm him; and if you see fit, put some aloes or myrrh mixed in a calenture, mustard, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica; then place your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance it may cause constriction of the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the swelling, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who is weak and alone, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and have the flaps be large; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and have him recover slowly and often, and one should have him recover by cutting across, not piercing; and this manner of recovery is saved from corruption of blood and numbness of nerve, and is worth more than long or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body is in need of bloodletting, it is necessary to give him moist bread soaked in grated apple juice; if he is overheated, then treat the wound three or four times with blood; and if he has a cold complexion, then soften the bread before bloodletting in a sweetened syrup, or in a perfumed honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it palms to the sinew, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks a broth of meat, and a subtle scented syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bend his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bend his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wants to heal from another side, then he must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated up and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw out a great quantity and widen the incision as long as it seems possible; then you should reward all the conditions of sinew, and place your hand on the pulses when it is healing, so that death does not come in place of pustules, and this happens many times when the physicians are negligent; and do not think that when you see the arm loosened, and blood issuing for the second time, and the incision is closed, that you should press strongly on it; nor if it is crooked, should you stretch out the arm quickly, for that would be bad; but leave it as long as it heals for the second time; or you will point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the incision of the vein issues forth, and place a small amount of oil on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires bleeding a second time, then let the blood flow in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins on the arm are healed at the place of the main vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	Et the manner of the surgery is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the skin is red; then it is tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, and the blood is now let out through the small hole, not the wide one or the long one; and the pores are large, and the surgeon makes sure to clean well near the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, he puts the hand back in hot water, and lets the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if this is in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put more at risk than in winter; and the surgery of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The surgery of the abscess on the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver; and this is the method: strain the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is empty, so that you can see it; and if the blood flows through, and you cut around it completely, then nothing will hurt; and don't go too far down into the wound, because the nerves are underneath all denuded of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound and can't come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as much as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to cauterize quickly, and thus do for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spleen is worth to all diseases that are under the body, so much as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and disease of the bladder, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its sickness is that the patient bathes his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein as long as it flows, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go out a great deal of urine; then she (the physician) gives or makes wider the vein, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you make it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and the vein should go across as in cutting; and let there be no inflammation.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot back in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the physician fails the first time, she renews it the second above a little bit, because the place is salty; nor should you doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the spleen of the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the thigh, and its vein is worth for the pain in the hip when it is full of blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	Et the qualities of his health are that the patient enters into the bath, and stretches above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then let the wound be treated in all ways you can, and crossing; and worth more than you cover it, for the limb is sound, and it is much returned to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not heal it, then let the wound be treated with some wine of that which opens the vein on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves; and do so much good to the blood as you see, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Wounds from cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by making an incision and drawing blood, or without making an incision.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is without harming if it is done in two ways: either all at once or without hurting; and the cupping that is done by hurting and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, from which some are on top of the head; others are around the neck; and 2 others are on each side of the neck; and the one under the chin; and the one on both shoulders; and the one above the hips; and the ones on both arms; and the ones on both legs; and the ones on both ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore one should not weaken it at all, as is done with wound treatment; and it is not necessary to administer it, nor all at once nor without hurting, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity demands ventosers due to diseases, or for the sake of customs, we shall administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between; because there are those who, when they need ventosers, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience repletion and redness on their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have the tongue shrunk, and drink blood; and there are those who dream, and see through nocturnal blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to cup after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sweating of the head is a help to headache relief that comes into eyes, and it does not need to be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the cephalic remedy, and it does not need to be used by those who are of cold complexion or have catharrhe, for it causes them great harm; and therefore, it is not suitable for old people nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often cured with this method will become forgetful, and because of this it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The hiccoughs in the middle of the neck are located near the throat and the basilica, and for this reason they are valuable for the constriction of the chest, and for the splitting of the canal of the peritoneum, and for all, and for repletion; and it is necessary to be careful, because if she holds too tightly, she will injure the obliqueness or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The hiccoughs are also in the two armpits of the neck, and they are valuable for the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and for strangulation, and for the pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is located near the sanctuary of the basilica; and you should command the patient to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not pinch the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The hiccoughs under the chin if they are worth a disease of the mouth, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the cures of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The hiccoughs of the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The hiccoughs of the armpits are as valuable as the three veins of the arm, for it drains blood from these large veins; and command the patient not to strike too deeply within, for the place is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The hemorrhoids that are on the backside are worth hemorrhoids of the fundament, and diseases below, and it is necessary that the hemorrhoid be large, and be of earth, so it has need to well draw out; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and there would be great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The hemorrhoids of the legs are clearly healed, for they bring forth blood from all the body, and are worth the ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and restore the flowers; and they are in the place of the two shins, and two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause to come forth pus in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the poultice is that you put it on first empty, and then succeed in a timely way, and apply it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and swollen, and behold the bleeding of blood; then cut, and remove the poultices, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: thus it is necessary to wound only once, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to wound twice: the first time to subtlety the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to wound a third time; and when we wish to draw out the blood little by little, then we should be satisfied only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a great deal of blood, so we repeat often; and if the blood is thick, so we pierce it deeply, and the ends should be cut so that the veins are felt suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have hard skin and strong pores that you anoint the sites of the cupping glasses with oil that is opening and dissolving: if this is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if this is in winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person has a tender skin and large pores, there is no need to put oil on it, but it is necessary to wash after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, should wash with ease, or with myrtle water, and sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluities lift themselves up with old wine, or with the water of sycamore, or with annet or camomile decoction, or similar things; and do not intend to be cured with a poultice before bathing or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards, but must beware when they are about to be purged and when they are purging.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are cleansing themselves and whose bile is too sharp and inflamed; so it's necessary that they take cold things, such as green grapes, endives, and lettuce in abundance, and similar things; and a little bit of meat, and the flesh of mutton, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, so they should take honey syrup and aromatic wine that is between old and new, and eat little and often, and small birds and young rabbits; and the day before they are to purge themselves, they should drink more than eat; and it's necessary to give some people treacle or musk at times before purging or afterwards to comfort the main members; and let the bile be subtle, but it's not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Les ventouses que sont mises sans ferir sont celles qui sont mises sur le foie, et sur la mime, et podagre, et sur le ventre et la boude et les reins et la hanche, car ce membre ne souffrent mie ferir sous eux, et ne le fait on que pour attirer sang de membre à membre, si comme nous mettons sous les mamelles quant il ne sainne; pour oster la viscosité qui est au membre, si comme nous mettons ventouses sur le ventre et sur la boude pour amenuiser le membre; et oster la douleur, quant il y a opilation ou pierre, si oster par sa vertu attractive par hasard l'opilation, ou déserter la pierre de son lieu; et ainsi fait-elle quant on la met sur le foie et sur la mime quant il y a viscosité retenue, et ces ventouses sont administrées vides pour sucer tant simplement; et aucune fois sont administrées ensemble feu, et auques fois pleines d'eau tiède, si comme en maladies du plesurin, et en telle manière on emplisse la ventouse d'eau chaude soula, ou d'eau où il a cuire des herbes convenables à cela.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered at fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont,
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: take the candle of wax or linen strip, and put it in the cupping glass across the rod that is in the cupping glass, so that the wick be at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the member, and make sure it is on the pustule we have said, so when you want to, if there is vapor, take off the cupping glass; and take the linen strip as before, and reapply often, if you need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass then which is administered in disease of pleurisy, always full, has no rod nor pustule, and is only applied when it is full of water, and is put on the member solely; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are only applied when it is not possible to put cups on account of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on denuded bones, such as those of the toe or knee, and others like them; and the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses that are in clean water without any impurities, take them; and put one new one in clean water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be bloodletted by vein and cupping glass, then rub the member until it becomes red, and put on the cupping glasses; and when they are full and swell, if there is a place where one can put cups, apply them, for this is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Se ceu non, if not
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	Et if the veins don't want to be taken, then wet the place of fresh blood, or stick an awl there until the vein comes out, and then put it on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will bind; and when you see that they are bleeding, then sprinkle some alum and vernice powder, or ash, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The book of fractures begins here.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desolation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that foolish men do not consider this chapter, nor have they ever seen any of the ancient books, nor read any letters; and for this reason is the art of learning strange in our land, for I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the art, and through experiment, and through the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what it contains, and abridged it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are necessary, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is then necessary that we say the prologue to this book, the summary of the word and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or quartering comes to someone, you must hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men; or if the weather is not very cold, or too hot; and beware of cold disorders, that is to say, chilliness, and flesh of hare and chevrier, and do not drink any wine, nor take any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about apostemic heat or spreading of matter in a member; so let the patient return to his former governance which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and beef's belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment the bones mend more quickly and sooner the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old men and decrepit people cannot be well reunited or soldered according to their nature due to the weariness of the members, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone with strong tendons that bind and join the member together, until it is as strong as before; and do not leave off from your work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish with heavy meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is one thing and the fracture of the back or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that occur when an arrow hits, and another when something is sharpened, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And then there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture in a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And at every kind of way have one's device, and one's proper instrument in restoration, according to what the reminder comes in its place; and is known the breaking of bone by that which the levers are twisted, and appears well by deflation, and sounds on pressing with the hand; and when there is no tortuosity nor sound at the toucher, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breaking; but it may be able to have tortuosity, or a crack, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But you must not move by hand, but put on the medications that come afterwards, and then restrain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And knows that the breaking which comes in a bowstring, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them now at an equal point, so that abscesses do not arise here; and if abscesses come here, let him leave alone for a day, until the abscesses are appeased; then set it equal as much as you can lightly and wisely, and knows that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces; then strain it, as it is necessary here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and they stretch over two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or to one's hand, or to two cords, or to one cord and one's hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are displaced, then restore by all means the additions to their places as quickly as you can, and guard that through your work does not bring harm or pain to the patient; and adjust well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And make it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then shape it nicely and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring forth abscesses hot and contractions in the member, as we have often experienced.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at rest, then chastise well the patient so that it does not move, nor in waking or sleeping, nor in turning or in any other way; and see to it that the member is so assured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, then it is not at rest, and one must put it in such a state that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set correctly, so that there be no twisting when it is restored; and the quality of the broken member is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If there is an inflammation or abscess, one applies a soothing poultice to the abscess hot and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days; then strain upon these stars, and be of middle size of a large cane reed cut, or of fir wood from which clefts are made, or of palm tree leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the star that one puts on the break be a little larger and wider than the others; and be also as long as it needs to be for the member of small or great size; then strain upon the stars just as you did at the first layer, then tie above with a cord in proportion, just as at the first layer on the break; the tighter it is, the less; and it is necessary that the cord be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax; for if the cords are thick, like I have seen the works of foolish people who make their bands from twisted linen threads, and that is a great error, for the band cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not need to have less than two fingers' width between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the splints' edges after the restraining in the healthy places, then put below them bandages of linen or woolen cloth, so that it does not get cut.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the skin is torn, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to restrain all broken members with splints on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Car when the members are great, there is no need to put on plasters sooner than after three days or seven days, or more according to the security of abscess happening unexpectedly; and here comes the manner of ancient emplastres for restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take wheat flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundance of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the emplastre restoring breakage in many dispositions, and indeed for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twisting: take aloes, ladani, and asphodel, and gum arabic, and mugwort, each 10 times; myrrh and aloe, each 5 times; and alchemil 8 times; and grind into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of emplastre that is good for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, anise nine times; myrrh and aloes, seven times; acaica six times; Armenian bolic ten times, and grind well, and mix with water or abundance of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to bind joints and separate bones from their places, and calm the pain that occurs, and use the bone for a splint, and for breaking: take new linen, and moisten it in ale and cooked oil, and apply it to the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore completely, but they are good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to embalm that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of earthy parsley, and crush them together, and make an emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to bind for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of balm-visage, camomile, violets' flowers, and wheat of oats, each in equal parts; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to bind, stronger than the first one, when a stubborn abscess comes to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and seed of flax, balaust, mellilot, and sansue, and flowers of violets and camomile, each from one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything other than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to embalm that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and horse's mane, or bird feathers, and wormwood, in equal parts, and crush them, and make an emplaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little bit afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not loosen it for many days. If pain comes to the place, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, then hurry, loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of moist sea water, plunge into water, and lift up the place, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, damp in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, as long as you are sure of no hot aposteme; and stop inflammation of the member, and be rid of the pain, then resume gentle poulticing, and a little emplastrum, and do not strain it so hard as before; and continue to do so until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need to apply an emplaster and binding, then begin again, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Et s'il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s'aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j'ai dit avant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n'est, saiches que norrissemens n'i puet venir; arouse lou donques d'aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c'est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n'i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l'ovrer droitement.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of breakages are, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined; for there are breakages that are made by percussion of a sword, and the bones are removed entirely, all the way to the suture which is beneath the bone, as done by an axe or a chisel; and therefore this kind of breakage is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone above without piercing, and it is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings can be great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a thrusting blow, or a split or breakage of the collarbone, or falling on stone, or from jumping down steps, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a breaking that presses, which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound can be great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound is sewn together in the bone as subtly as a mouse's hole, and the split is small, and therefore this breakage is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by piercing with an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter downwards, and the hair-like cracks are like those made by chimney sweeps when they sweep above the chimneys; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have soft and moist bones, like the skulls of infants; and it happens to all these kinds of breakages that small pieces are dislodged as they are; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breaking by subtraction on them, and inquiry at the tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary resemblance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and strokes it with a cloth above, then the black breakage appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the like coming out and reddening, and other similar things in more or less disposition, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unforeseen accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day from the time you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the flesh beneath the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break in the bone comes to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut into the broken part thus; and it is that you take hold of the patient's head, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if bleeding comes out to reveal the bone, or an abscess appears, then provide the necessary aid, and it is that you fill the wound with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess has subsided, and be sure of no further bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut into a narrow strip before, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put one other cutting larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron sharp; and work lightly, lest you wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuttings with tarers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a margin or one circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place in the shape of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tarers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one tare above the bone, and turn it to your two sides until you know the bone is pierced; then place the tare elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut out the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertu, and make it as subtle as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacral vertebra.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, then it is necessary that you sharpen the point that remains of the bone to all other instruments similar to a chisel, but it must be more keen and subtle than the other chisels; and if there remain nothing of small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with the instruments; then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Gauls say, which is more sure; and it is very strong, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this incisor-like instrument, and this is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And don't cut at all from one side, and the parts are aligned in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upwards, so that you lightly touch the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below; if it's stuck to the bone, gently lift it, for one lifts well without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the flesh, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle scraper of which you should have various quantities, so as to apply the most suitable remedy in each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	So scrape first with great scrapers, and then with more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate cuttings and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you apply remedy according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily grasped by one who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the scab is uncovered, it's necessary that you take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you don't irritate the scab, then administer the other liquid above the first one, and don't strain it too much until it holds only the wound; and let it be like this for a day or two until the abscess is pacified, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as plant roots, barley flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and make powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and administer medications gradually without biting; and watch that the wound is clean afterwards, lest you leave the ointment or assemble a bow, for when the bow assembles on the brain's membrane, they run and burst forth, and cause great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the scab, it becomes inflamed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no harm that comes other than the medicine that has been applied above, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in a cloth wrap I, and put it on the skin; then perform the cure in the ways of cures as it is needed, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only becomes bent or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you push your little finger or a small piece of bone into the break, and put it in its natural position within your finger's index, and fill it up by degrees, until the bone returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and cannot come back into place, so it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the original state, if you can; if not, after seven or ten days, when the abscess has subsided, then push into the head of the bone, testing with cloths of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another of the other part, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the perforations of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And certain physicians say one must dampen the tents with butter, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that it is good, but it should be moistened with a mixture of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilages are tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts a goose's neck in place of tents, and if it has a soft cloth around it, and the break is held, and blows on the patient between; then do as you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear on the neck while you are working there, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of aquilina.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the apostemes do not come, he puts an ointment on by way of plaster, made with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then puts it on gentle fires, and does not bind the night; and if the break in the night is small, and it is broken into small pieces, he stretches it to suitable instruments, then mends the opening, and cures things that are raw, and unites, as ointments and plasters suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the night, he cures the tent, and puts in pieces of cloth, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jaw's dislocation
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no wound outside, and the break is outside only so far as to be felt internally, but is not broken in two, except that it is swollen inside, then one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, that you put your little finger index in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your little finger index of the right hand, and gently push the break inside, and adjust it with the other hand away from it, and make equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, so it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of teeth occurs, or dislocation, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerate, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a great piece well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then release it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put an emplaster on, made of miller's powder with hen's egg white or spelt flour, after you have removed the cerate; and put a light linen cloth on top, and if the emplasters dry up, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, then return none of the bone that has been removed; but subtlety in removing with suitable instruments for that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and put on one or more suitable emplasters to bring about flesh growth, until he is healed.
de la forcele	of the fracture
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks in several places before the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: or it is broken and dislocated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or it has a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two attendants, one of whom holds the shoulder piece that feels the fractured forcele; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break equal to your fingers, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth or linen, and make it as thick as your necessity demands; and stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you place the break equal, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele away from the outside, because it comes from deep down, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his bedstead, and put a middle pillow under the shoulder; and have the attendants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the break to your fingers, and if you find it debrisied, so it is necessary that you split it open; and draw forth the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut off at one of the incisors you have; but put this instrument under the forcele, to ward off the syphilitic.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	et semble une cuiller
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a cold abscess comes, then moisten it with cloths in oil of rose, and aloe, and wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, is when you put plaster on the bone, that of mill dust and egg white, and lightest stoppers on top, and put a small spear under the assemblage, if needed; then take a very large band, one palm wide, and wrap it double over the stoppers, and plaster; then take a thin steel plate three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band so that the band's ends are even; and put the plate on the shoulder, and turn the band around the neck, and under the assemblage sound and sick; and wrap each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the shoulder properly, and you see clearly that the steel plate does not move over the broken bone, so reward it each day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it; and make the patient sit on his back, and put under him a small pillow or bolster under the assemblage, to lift the aid in high; thus ease the break of the shoulder by the easing of the shoulder joint, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie unless bad accidents come, for up to twenty days; then re-plaster if you see that it has need, and strain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in about twenty-eight days, and in less than some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder breaks or widens its natural place by one mile, and no one knows how it will be except by touch; if you prepare according to the figure of the breakage, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put powder from the mill with abundance of egg on the site, and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top; then put a large and subtle steel plate, one pace longer than the shoulder, and if there are any gaps underneath the steel plate anywhere on the shoulder, so use those gaps to sew linestrips into place, so that the steel plate stays evenly; and then bind it tightly with a strong bandage, so that the steel plate does not move from its place, and watch over it each day; and whenever it swells, bind it again, and keep the steel plate even if it strays from its place, and have the patient sit on their chest; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is complete, then release it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that gets put back into place easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and points below the key, then do this, and the bone, and do what we have said in the break of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the rib break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and by chance may vomit blood, and the sinews are torn in the broken bone, and one feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient sits on their back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and gently puts it even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and poultices above the fine roll of salt, or other light stuff, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around again at the back, and bind it well, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes swollen, then bind it again; and if it needs to be released because of corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and release it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come forth with regards to cures; then rewrap the plaster, and bind it until they are healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib break
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breakage of the ribs does not come from anything other than large blows after the back, and from the top inside, and do not bend except because they are swollen; and one feels well in the investigation at the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is that you put the break equal to what it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind with a steel band, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the fabric; and breathes with difficulty, and all around, and vomits a great quantity of blood, and this is a grievous sickness, and the ancients have put great wit into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push back the breakage forward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come, if they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let him be healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that you put poultices on the place to draw forth strongly, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the poultice will attract the superfluities to the place due to the weakness of the flesh.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the place with moist linen in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put even the bandage around, then be careful about the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which points to the wound, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to guard against the scab; and then one must cut into the bone, and pull out slightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and dress with plaster until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to be, then put moist cloths on it in rose oil, and put it on the lesion; and care for the wound as is necessary for the abscess, and be watchful on the spot where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes that breaks at the bone of the neck, and then it bends; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you see if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that there are many mortal signs, and if they do not move and feel well when one tightens and pricks them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts care into it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you see if it will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there is a swelling in the hands that are on the back, and windy ventosity and evacuation without willing; and when one has operated on his belly, so there is evacuation without willing.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is bent over his back and wants to settle down, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor much in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is more easy.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you rub if there is a warm abscess, then put oil of rose or oil of egg yolk on the spine until it is calmed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is cured.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, you should cover it with the key; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then apply an ointment releasing fat, until he is cured; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the jaw", take your pouch from your left hand and put it even with your right hand as far as you can, then apply the poultice and bandage on it, if needed; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do so, and remove them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does, then there is a slight diminution at the head; and it swells along, and declines in the pelvis, and comes to the patient's pain at the location, and pricks, and inflames what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand on top, as far as you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then put equal pressure on that breakage, until it returns to its natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is of the long bone, or it declines inside, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, then put on a poultice, then put on a bandage of wood or key, and restrain the breakage, so that it does not move; and bind the location below the ribs, until the limbs are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if warm abscesses come, do not touch them, until the warm abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as needed, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of wood smooth and full of growth, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two shoulders with two bands, and stretch them up high, and make the patient sit on one chair; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the level, and has about a half a curve of wood, then stretch onto some heavy thing or have the assistants extend downwards; then put the mirror under the breakage equal to their hands together, until the breakage returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one soothes the patient on his hayre, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants to have one hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others hold below each band, and stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, so hold the ligature below the wound, and above the wound, and stretch each of the attendants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is near the shoulder's head, it is necessary that you put the ligature midway under the armpit, and the other towards the point of the shoulder, below the wound; and also if the wound is on the side of the point, it is necessary to put the ligature lightly, without labor, until the wound is even with the shoulder's head, and on the point; then set the wound straight, as needed, and bind it, lest apostemes come there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if warm abscesses come, do not bind it at all until seven days, and put on a damp linen cloth in oil and rosewater, until the warm abscess is calmed; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the poultice on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and apply the compress, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a position to be straightened without being hindered by anything, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use strait bands, and put on the breakage a band wider and stronger than the others, with two or three fingerbreadths between each band, and have each band so large that it passes over the breakage three fingers from each side; then bind on the bands, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less strait.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of stars and estranging, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days to the bandage, lest pruritus or inflammation come to the place, or the swelling not be able to come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is addressed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident comes to it, then do not remove the bandage for more than three days or longer, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and look every hour throughout the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not move or become soft the ligaments; then address it by the power of medicine, and give him food as we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be set in place for forty days from then; and then one must loosen and administer bath and medicinal ointments to direct the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it will remain for seven days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", where one is small and is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little thumb; by chance, it breaks the large foscile alone, or the small, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, restoration is easy and healing occurs; and when large bones are broken, healing is poor and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's the small bones that are broken alone, then one must gently stretch and set them equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bones that are broken, then one must stretch them more strongly; and extend on the first cushion, and lift the little pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small bones be lower than the other bones, and have the patient cross himself over himself, with the first cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor. Then stretch the attendants' arm to the part under his hand, or to the strap, and another attendant on the top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirror equal to his better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces, then set each one in its place, and if any are loose that can be pulled out, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a new one and use the bone, as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if you have spoken of the break with a wound in a singular chapter, then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the treatment some abscesses arise, then make a paste of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and apply the paste subtly above, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the wax, and put the poultice of miller's powder with a great deal of egg, and set the splints, and let the splint be on the breakage in this way: more strong and larger than the others; and know that it should have six splints or arms in many dispositions: whether the breakage is in one bone, or two; and strain it more above the breakage than elsewhere, and always less away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the drapes be on top of the breakage soft and moist, not hard nor dry; and let the cord, which holds it in place, be linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching which comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itchings are calmed down; and let the member not at all remain resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommence the stretching, and if the joint is softened and the bones are separated, and similar things, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the stiffness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be like that for some days, until the stiffness goes away, and then strain.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, then do not untie for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or around it, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and gesturing, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and as to the thumbs, there are many breakings, and it does not come but that pleasure comes many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit directly in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch out the assistants to the broken bones, and set them equal with the mirror, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then place a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a cloth made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is on the edge of the palm around the belly of the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken hand; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be as soft as the palm of the hand, and strain, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the far end, then it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another one below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the joint between the thumbs.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our thumbs, such as the index or one of the others, then set it straight and equal, as it is necessary; and strain with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and it does not move; and if the break is at the other thumb, then set it straight and equal, and tie it with the healthy thumb that comes after; or you tie them all together in one holding, as it seems best, or you put a splint on top, such as the pouchet; and take care of the restoration and the disposition of the hot abscess, and attend to what comes, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken toe
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the toe is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one thread is tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each assistant's thread to its equal part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near to the root of the heel, so that one of the ligaments points towards the armpit, and the other ligaments are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and then be the ligament below the knee, and be the extension downwards; then place the mirrors on the bone with both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and tie it, lest abscesses come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, then let it be calmed first and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in the same manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the break with a bandage made of doubled cloth in two or three layers, and remove any superfluities; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and insert a long thread between the heel and the leg, below the knee joint, and let it come out above; then turn up the bandage on the leg and heel; then place two or three estelas on the break, and one estela on the bone of the leg; then employ the eight threads between the leg and heel with soft drapery to put equal tension; then begin to tie firmly three turns or four around the break; and as you go up above the break, and less tension; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have inserted between the leg and heel, and tie three estelas above; then come back down below to the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and if it does not move from its place, then leave it so, lest an aposteme or swelling or other similar thing occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is, then loosen it, and adjust what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then it is necessary to remove them if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh and draw out the force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And once the crotch is broken like this, one puts stays in it, as in an aid and on the arm; however, in this restoration made, the patient does not ache.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the crotch is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the hollow of the knee there is often a small break, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, but only a slight crack or perforation occurs, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one makes equal what is bent to its knees, so that it can be assembled as much as possible; then put the plaster, and I put a rounded stay, if you have need of it, and the straining as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakages, such as aposteme, heat, and any such thing; then apply to each accident what is needed, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "malleolus" and the other "fibula"; and it has all sorts of breakage as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal with that of the arm, and the work is done there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns every which way.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, then turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer an extension and place it evenly, and tie the splints equally; but still, it is necessary if the break is ugly and there are many pieces that the extension be smaller and lighter; and loosen according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, then take two pieces of fust covered with linen that surround the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap in two places one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and so the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some give a support of fust along the length of the leg, and it is of linen, and put the leg to prevent movement, and properly make what is in the breakage where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is aposteme, heat or any other accident; then cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from a breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and bend a little, and there is no more harm than just stiffness in several positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones rising one above the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they were about to walk, and then place your own foot beside theirs where the bones are lifted, and press down until they return to their places; then apply plaster and compresses above, and below the belly of the foot a small pad with two full sheets, then bind the foot properly, and when you have wrapped drapes around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the toes broken, then restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a stay according to the length of the toe, and be a little bit wider, then place below the foot that pad which I said, and bind it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, then put on each toe a stay according to its quantity, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and bind the pad below the foot; and let it be so that it holds well at the top of the pad above the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and take care of each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand of the man is broken or that of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the book of the hare; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there and attends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies to many the right way of restoration: listen then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the arm, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and insert it into the arm; then wrap cloth around it three days or more, and it will be healed hastily.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed immediately, so that the wounds that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and then remains raw with vitriol, or you have nothing else to do, then begin again to restore the break in the same hour, or on that same day, lest apostemes come there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if apostemes come there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the apostemes are calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring forth a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the surface above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put a small pin into it gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not prepared to be put in equal with your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches of length, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according as he needs them in each treatment of breakage; and be round and a little bit thick, so it does not bend much under compression on the member at your work, and be pointed forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the curved nail be placed on top of the visible bone; and set it once, until it recedes, and be equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it is necessary that you shape the top of the bone, so that the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then file it down with a suitable instrument, or chisel or scraper, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black stiptic wine, and truly that is how to do it; and do not put anything on the wound except a compress or other dressing where there is oil, lest you bring forth rot and corruption; then administer the ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover all around with a bandage according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted by the break; and many times this has been done by foolish healers, and they have brought upon the patient death or corruption at times; and let the straining be gentler and more soothing than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil events may happen, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it does not need to be put on with ointments; but instead, envelop around, in place of ointments, hard cloths and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the bow of the wound is growing, then take away what you put on top all wine, and place healing ointment on the wound, as with fourfold medicine and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is solidified and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bows bend downward slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead forms a bow, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason you must wash the wound with tent, and remove all these splintered bones that bring forth that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what is written in its chapter before this.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the member, as with the hip or shoulder bone, and other similar great members, do not pull it out at once, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it can be set; by chance it will fall into place after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come across after the healing of the breakage, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed then if it is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or egg white or oil; and put them on the night in saucers, and strain it well, and do not remove it for three days; then release it, and begin another one, until the swellings are removed; or you may apply a piece of linen well made; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swelling from the members; and if the nodation has already become hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then file down on top, and make the superfluity apparent; or have it removed by a barber, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is needed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break of the bone is restored and remains after the members are weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come to the nourishment of the member; or due to excessive swelling; or due to very great movements, not in its time; or because it has a little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and have their body relaxed, until their blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths to them, and give them joy and ease; then apply poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often with cool water, until the nourishment flows to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The injured limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken open, and the form of the limb ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe those who say one should break the limb all over again; many fools have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes even death; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then they must be raised with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as dill leaves, roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and a mollifying plaster, like well-made dyaquilon, and take the juice of dill, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fat figs, and grind them with henbane fiber, and similar medicines that hasten the healing.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is loosened by constant and continuous rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be a gentle movement to the member each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and indurated like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut all the way to the bone, lightly cutting with a subtle incision; and put attention and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	The book of dislocations begins here
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it must be brought back into place promptly.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Because if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, if one resets it with points at the swollen area; therefore it is not good to move it until it has subsided: many times spasms and other pains come; however, when this happens, make the patient well again, then leave them, until the abscess is fully appeased; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently realign it, and cure each member as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters of dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: or they are slightly pulled out of their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the saliva from the mouth flows so much that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps around his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in a few arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you should realign it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and put the mirror's pouch from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two hands are free to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax his mandibles, and move them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if the two jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they reset slightly; nor delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back even, and the patient's mouth closes well with a softening sensation, then place moist cloths on them in a wax made of rose oil and beeswax, and gently tie them with soft threads; and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their limbs between two cushions, so that they do not move to either side, nor make an effort to speak, but take light food, as long as the pains are gone, and the jawbones are numbed; and then eat what they want lightly, and do not trouble themselves with opening their mouth to eat and drink, until the jawbone is well numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fevers and severe constipation come, and by chance, dissolution of the bowels, and by chance, vomiting of pure gall.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a misfortune; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the front side within its continuity and towards the chest, and is sometimes dislocated to the back, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage, and bind it tight; and the bone that is opposite the cut cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the poultice and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and in the same way, bring back the bone of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: firstly, it dislocates towards the lower part of the armpit; secondly, it dislocates towards the back; and thirdly, it dislocates towards the upper part, which happens rarely; nor does it dislocate backwards for the shoulder or inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for then it is done hastily; but in those who have enough flesh, it jumps at paces, and returns at paces.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and below the armpit to touch the head of the shoulder, just like it is an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place nor move with any movements; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not suitable for returning when it is new or the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the servant lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fingers underneath it and lifts the jointure upwards to its place; and the servant lifts his hand and stretches it up high, then puts it underneath; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in three days after, so it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should rise up soothing and assuaging, like a decoction of althea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and should bring it; then the patient should be laid on their back, and a woolen pad equal, not too soft or too hard, should be placed under them, and the doctor should put their fingers on the patient's heel on the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the patient's hand; and another attendant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; now this shoulder is coming back, and if you see it in this manner: and then make sure a person who is bigger than the patient is present; and they should stand facing the coast, and push the patient's shoulder under the attendant on the pad, and lift the pad high so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant should draw the patient's hand down towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he will bear with him something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one also remedies it in another way: and is this on long iron placed in the earth, from which the head will be as hot as a piston, and not too thick nor too narrow; then it should be put under the patient, but only after he has wrapped himself softly above, and the patient's hand should be stretched down below somewhat, and the jointure will return to its place promptly; and if it does not want to come back for all these things we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of iron from two arms and four fingers wide, which has the tip bent so as to fit easily into the crevice under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie a soft cloth on top of the head of the wood, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it underneath the shoulder blade of the patient; and stretch your arm up over the long wood, and hold the assistant's hand on top of the wood, and the arm to the tip of the hand; then put the arm on one shoulder of a board two fists in width, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever way, then it is necessary that you put underneath the shoulder blade a sphere of equal wool, then place the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and an egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and turn the cloth over the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage it little, until the limbs are comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to three apertures, as shown before the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it does not hold after seven days, and the joint is not held, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast or the armpits, or behind, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and one should administer another treatment; and cure until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes swelling in the limb and delayed movement, then have the patient take many baths until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the jointure of the shoulder is dislocated in points and comes back in points; and it has been dislocated from all parts, and indeed both before and behind, and the dislocation is not responded, because one sees well and feels well; and becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the wound to the skin, so it can be seen clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is severed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as the abscess comes to life, for if the abscess comes to life, then it would be grievous to reset; and by chance cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is this: when it is such that one can reset it, then you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and push the joint into its places together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the shoulder that is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and this is because two ministers extend the arm, and hold it steady, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm on each side, when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it; and when the surgeon has joined the jointure to her hand, anoint the jointure with some oil to soften the jointure, then bind the jointure firmly, until it returns to its place; and when it is at its place, apply plaster dry with some egg, and bind it firmly, and leave the arm on the patient's neck for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then separate the bond and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then separate it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	Et if he feels grievousness after the resetting of the joint, and it settles, so bathe him well and rub gently, and press until he is eased; or you put on the jointure a snow of fat sheep, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, soothly rub the jointure, then put the snow back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do twice or thrice, until he is healed; and if you see, so put on hay of moist cow's milk warmed with butter, and strain it on him; so he will return to his disposition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the swelling is light, more so than other joints Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place hastily, in the same hour that it dislocates, before the swelling becomes inflamed or an abscess forms hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the healthy hand, and have the patient place his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and press until it revives. Nevertheless, it is necessary to look if he is well in place; then put the patient's hand on a table at the stretching and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient puts his back towards his hand on the table, and the doctor places his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back now, it is well; if not, then one should apply soothing poultices to abscesses and leave them in this way so as not to start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and no harm comes to the patient unless his hand is inflamed, and he cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are strained or the arteries; so there is no other remedy than to strain by fire-cautery in this case, and by chance it may be of some use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, and strain it and leave it five days, then take it off and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until he is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the wrist of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly; then the finger remains and pushes the dislocation into its socket as far as it can come back, then supports the head of the finger and leads it towards the part where it is separated; and leaves it for two days, and then puts it in line on that day; and binds it with a bandage, just as we have said, and loosens it again from day to day, and makes it move, and relieves the bandage; and does this often until it is straight, and likewise does this when it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and does it in the same way as before, until it is healed; and likewise does this when it is dislocated from the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the coccyx of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the coccyx of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, then there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak in great words, where there is not much benefit at all; but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed instruments in various manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositey that comes to the pit of the belly before, there is no intelligence nor health; and similarly that which comes directly between two sides, and one cannot cure fever except for that which properly comes from behind, as I say; and it is that the patient lies stretched out on their back in an equal position, and has a strain below them, so they do not injure themselves; then place one tisserie on the head on the ground, and another by the feet, and tie two straps parallel to each other around the patient's shoulders, and at the hips, and at the knees; and the two attendants should know the straps, the one on the head and the others by the feet, between the two tisseries; and be well fastened, the tissiers as we have said, and the mirrors put their palms on the spine in a straight line, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a piece of wood three arms long, and hollow out the bottom part, and the patient should be lying on their side, and insert the top part of the wood under the skin, then place the middle part of the wood on the spine; and put the mirrors' feet on the other end of the wood, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, make the same turn that turns at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you put two brands at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards their feet, and between each brand, a palm's breadth of wood length; and each brand has one pore, where the turn goes through, and the brands are firmly stuck in the ground so they don't move; and between each pair of brands is one turning brand, above which the turns go around, and there are two small brands of a palm's breadth to turn the turn; and then tie the cord that is among the rings at the head turn towards the chief, and the other cord towards the feet at the other turn, and each of the servants turns their turn all along the cord, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, and then she puts poultices drying with abundance of eggwhite, and then binds it, and then makes an incision of a tablet of three fingers in length, that it occupy the place of the hipbone and the part of the spinal bone, so that the patient be sound; and if nothing comes at the end of healing, then one must administer soothing and soft medicines with the instrument we have said before; and sometimes one gives a piece of cloth, and sometimes an appearance appears in the back of the spine on the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and that is the bone which opens, for which one should not presume at all: by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come together except in dislocation alone, nor does it happen like with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inwardly than outwardly, and less dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when you join the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more to the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the ailing patient cannot double their knee over the fire; and the swelling is in the place below an abscess hot, because the head of the groin comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens outward is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens before is that his leg is well-shaped according to completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he walks, it passes above the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and is that leg more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the head of the crix at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are that you return if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no care; and one should not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh and it's of the three manners of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and the splint inward and outward, and adjust it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	Et s'il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles le ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort à II mains, ou à I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et un autre ministre estende sa main dessus en telle manière qu'il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l'estrigne d'un souef lien sur la cuisse; et un autre tienne le chef du lien; et estendent amont et aval tout à une fois, tant que le malade soit levé de terre à une fois, et demeure pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to apply care to its semblance. When the dislocations are in the pubic region, it is necessary that you support the patient on his natural side, then place the ligament on the root of the thigh, and the part that is below the groin; then stretch the ligament upwards towards the groin, and towards the femur; then take another minister's arms, and encircle the thick part of the ill-treated thigh, and stretch it forth strongly: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Et se tu ne la peux serrer en ceste maniÃ¨re que nos avons dit, si convient que tu lies les II piés du malaide ensemble d'un fort lien souef sur les II talons, et sur les II genoux, et soit le jambe malade estendu II doigts plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chef d'un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de long; puis commande à un ministre qu'il embrasse le chef de la cuisse, et soit un autre ministre qui pend avec le malaide, qui embrasse fortement la cuisse, car la jointure revient maintenant hâtivement.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of gilboesitee, and strain the bandage tightly around the afflicted leg and hip; then put two hot coals, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a coal between the patient's thighs in the middle form; and have planted damp cloths all around, so that the patient does not burn, then stretch each minister towards him, and the surgeon sets an equal distance from his hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on the table, and press it thus as we have said in the gilbosity, and let the patient lie on their right side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and make the doctor place his hand on the diseased groin, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is forward, then it's not necessary to extend the patient downward, nor lift them up on the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated forward, as we have said about lying on two hips; and let it lie on its face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be correct when the patient stretches their legs, and they are even; then adjust the groins, and apply the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and if you see that they are even, then strain again, as before, and leave for three days or four; then release, and let it go smoothly, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The kneecap is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and forward, and backward; and does not come undone before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, and if she does not fit her cuixe, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient stand upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take hold of their knee with your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister stretches out his foot, until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that he has set his leg lightly into its socket; and put the poultice on, and make the leg fit at the socket, and bind them together strongly for three days or four, then release him; and do not trouble the patient to move, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not straight, then it should be stretched strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes sprained and sometimes fully dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tend towards the part where it is dislocated: the returns should be gentle, and one should stretch it gently by hand when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit straight and hold the assistants only by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch upwards, and nicely push the foot up; and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a bolster firmly on the ground between their thighs, and bind cloths around, so the patient does not get hurt; then hold the assistants to the thigh, and another assistant stretches the foot towards your hands or to the line, which is tied above the ankle of the foot; then stretch each assistant equally, and the bolsters should be close together between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when one is stretching; then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation in your hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is in place, he puts the plaster and bandages on top, and binds strongly, and ties the foot to the leg, and watches the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligament is not too tight; then he leaves it two days or three, and if the ligament has loosened, he loosens it again; then he frees it on the fourth day or quarter, and advises the patient not to walk for four days; and if he walks before that term, it is not a surety that it will still dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, then you must calm them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the elbows
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the elbows are dislocated, it is well to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the heel of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a firm floor or on .ie. table straight ahead, and put your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press your foot strongly, until it realigns; and when it is even, and there appears nothing, then place a board under the heel of the foot two inches, then bind strongly, and leave it three days, then release; and let it rest, until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.
Amen	Amen
