O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine together with its contents, and I have finished it through his explanations and through his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is alien to everything else, so the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except for the small descriptions in old books that have been handled by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and are shut off the intentions, and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revitalize it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of the members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and the arrangement and movements and rest positions, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not familiar with what has been said before, beware lest he fall into error and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who deal with this science abandon their science and sense experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut out an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in an old man's bladder and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land which was broken, and with the breakage had an open wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, forced the break to be set on top of the wound without any binding, and did not leave even a little bit of cloth between them, and so left it until the leg became completely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to relieve the leg; and when I loosened it so he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in all cases the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who opened up an infected abscess and then inflamed it through the evil influence of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many situations; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So take up your arms in good faith, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrifying diseases to suffer from bad health; and lay aside your doubts and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on yourself a bad disease unless you are called a foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to foot; and about the forms of instruments, and surgical dressings, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torquing, and similar things; and it is organized from head to foot, with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest and most subtle speech and secret responses; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I suffice little for their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where it has material, except for two complexions: namely, hot and dry temperament with material, and cold and dry temperament with material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry temperament with material, some people have decided and said that cauterization is great help; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use to a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite say that cauterization makes great help to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true some times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, do not meddle with things except for him who has experimented and knows by long use the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the surprises and the hope of the time; as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cauterization is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater benevolence than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is cooking the one that is being cauterized, and does not harm another member if not by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another, and cause disease in the afflicted member, leading to grievous suffering, and by chance, killing the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, due to its highness and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this for you through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is answered by fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say in demonstrating; accept it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is removed by the aid of cauterization; and similarly if cauterizations are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so, but it is not as they suppose, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, but rather it surpasses medicine in its haste to be effective, and in the virtue of its work and lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place where the disease occurs, and there are excesses gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time when there are few excesses and moisture, as with dens cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intention is wrong, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	So it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this for no reason, but because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the site of the cautery does not cause rotting, but it is not true, for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some people; and cauterizations with gold are more effective than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is red-hot by the color of the gold, and it has soon cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cauterization because we have made it appear suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ended this chapter up to here, so that the way may be more easy to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to abundance of dreams and pains in the teeth and throat, and also all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine, clearing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then do reapply the medicine to the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the weight scale; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it come to rest where your middle finger will be, so that it bleeds inwardly and then apply the cautery called "olivare", which is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make your hand move downward and outward in a small circular motion; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the mark if you see the bone about one inch deep; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have told you; after that, take one handful of gauze, wet and soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply a moist poultice in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and therefore it is of greater aid.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should cauterize until it is so hot that the bone is softened as wide as a thimble that women put in their purses, so that the humors can flow out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one must cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except that they may be suitable for some people who have a way of trembling with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone; because the bone is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we observe in other members; and similarly when the patient's skull is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and gentle for me, and I work with this principle alone in order to bring about salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain from the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use yeeris and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head, oils, and emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have said before, it does not count.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery beneath that cautery which we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is one spot where one puts poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of this later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those by which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and that's the form.
dou cautere dou chief	of the head's cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease spreads up to the eye, and the head is purged by worldly medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases have been tried, and none of it profits: then he makes cauteries according to two methods, namely by medicinal fire and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal fire cautery is when you take an almond, remove the skin and crush it into a small amount for two horns, then make a temple incision where the pain stays in such a way that you can place the crushed almond under the skin; and when it is placed, tie it tight and hold it so for 12 hours; then untie it and treat the wound with oil of garlic for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice soaked in butter until purulence occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed; and if you see that it is necessary to apply some burning medicines that I have written or do not know how to treat.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery so that it has the following form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made to the shape of a bell or it has one piece of cork, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that the half of the iron's edge is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton on top of the seal, and place it on the wound for 3 days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then cure the wound with oil so that it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauterizations from medicine and fire do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line of half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves have regard only for movement and spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in someone who does not know what he is doing, and who is not experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how one stays blood loss when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of earache from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When earache comes from cold and one has tried medicinal solutions and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, prick all around the afflicted ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and make 10 pricks around each ear; afterwards, cure the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterization for similar cases that come from scorching and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similar torture that moves from phlegm and idleness and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third in the seam of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears to be sound, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a small piece below the horn of the head, and one in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until the half of the iron's edge is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is similar to the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after, cure the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the "vasselz" spot as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	from lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	To this illness it is necessary to give the patient great years and pills made of common things for the brain; afterwards, make the patient's head entirely bare, and place on the back of their head a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the method of the cautery: if he does it just as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, make him three cauterizations on the head going down to the neck, with a space of two days between each one; and cure him as the others, and if you see any swelling or inflammation, make another cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and let the cautery be called "olivare", just as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned with years and what we have said before; afterwards, make the patient's head bare, then do a cautery on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the burn is burned off, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is well, and that cautery which is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to clean the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure this, make him gargle and chew on something that cleans the brain often with good meats; afterwards, make his head bare in the middle, and do one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one cauterization on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be an olive cauterization according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then make those cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is said before in the section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After making the patient's head bare; afterwards, make one linen cloth well-made, like a circle, and place it on the head; and have the patient sit crossed-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; afterwards, present the liniment, and melt some butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over temperate fire, so that the doves can bear to drink it; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool down; and make this treatment for the patient once a week with good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see that the cauterization is making many points all over the cautery. This manner of cauterizing moistens the brain equally; and then put on a wet cotton cloth in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the ache of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When ache comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and keep watch over all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command the patient to bare their head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the ache is to both eyes together, or to one eye only; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision, how to stop it; and never make a cauterization or incision under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses, then do the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the ache descending to the eyes: one cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or incisions under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize sagitally above the eyebrow with every little cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three night's worth of cooked chicken; afterwards, make his head bare, and do a cauterization on the middle of the olive cauterization; and do two cauterizations of the "clavilis" type on the eyebrows, one little bit below the hairline; and take care not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cauterization which is called "olivare". Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the opposite direction, and point to the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs as long and equal as they are; and if they start pointing in their natural direction, then restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they have grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then the patient should apply to the skin; afterwards, sign above the eyes on paper a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put a moist cotton cloth in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery where there is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you signed piece by piece several times, until the skin is burned away; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burn is removed; after apply ointment treatment until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the eyes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment copy of the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coal, each half an ounce, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread the mixture on the form you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on paper over the eyes; and if the patient holds only one eye, work on one eye, and if both equally; and put a moist cotton cloth in egg white under the eye; and the patient's head should be in its natural state and place your two fingers showing above the medicine, and press gently each time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it feels like burning as with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the cloth and see if you see the paper raised as if it had been lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes are in order; then put on a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burned skin is gone, after applying ointment treatment called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must be careful with your work by great vigilance that the medicine does not affect the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that same place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after applying ointment treatment until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this you should make your constructions; and do not take as true the right way for him whose study is in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	(The text switches to a new topic)
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it a fire cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and hold the servant's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or leave his head; after, place moistened cotton in an egg white or persimmon juice on the eye; after this, heat the cauterizer which is thus: and shape it to the head as a vulture's feather, together with its quill being the cauterizer; if you see, it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, it should be like a tent; but in any case, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the discharge, and dry it; and if it is closed, do so, and draw out the bowstring; after put hot cauterizer on top, and hold your hand to the cauterizer at the part above the eye, lest your hands do foolish things; and place the cauterizer in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterizer just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then start the cauterization again once or twice more if needed, and leave it for three days; after that, put moistened cotton in butter, and treat the wound with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no ancient said. Understand the fistula, and open it up; after put in the opening one subtle camphor which has this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it in the quantity of three pints; and hold your hand with camphor firmly, and do not let the patient move until the pomade has melted and reached his eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton on the eye; the pomade so closes the opening of the fistula, and brings forth marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to perforate the eye, and bring back the fistula to its place in the eye according to what is needed in its own proper position.
des crevaices en levres	cracks on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times happen cracks on the lips which are called "piles", and similarly on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizer according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it hastily in those cracks until it comes to a point; after, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it has purged and rotted and become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after, cut open or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the point of it, and at the back; and do thus once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your hand; after heat the cauterizer which will take this shape as follows, placing it over the tooth like a cord; and put hot cauterizer inside hastily, and hold until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and start the cauterization again according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it stay for an hour and then draw out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or there is cold air or heat, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways: a cauterization in butter and a fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The cauterization in butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and melt the end of it in an iron or copper spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; and if you see that wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and then apply a hot iron until the fire reaches the apex of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cauterization together with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or copper, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heat the cauterizer, which will take this shape as follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during the application of that cauterization, and then rinse with water; and this is the shape of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterization at whichever point you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the cord:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of cold water and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then heat the cauterizer which has this shape as follows, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one part to the other; and put the hot cauterizer on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then make a cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply moistened cotton in butter until the swelling is removed; after treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant the moistors overcome on the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after which make a fire cautery at the root of the throat, but take care not to come too close to the throat and burn only a little bit. After which make another fire cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the wound so as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the body are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor heat, and it is an old disease, then make two cauteries on the flank in the hollows; and one other cautery between the breasts; and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a fire cautery on the point of all the points that are called "points" of which the form is described before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to 30 or around. After that, cure the wound according to what is said before, and make three cauterizations at the joints according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of that, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do them in three places at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first re-set the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, be careful to the patient on their back and side; after lift up the key that is inside the title as with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then reheat the cautery which has two handles of oak, according to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the key until it pierces up to the side, and come the figure of the cautery together four times; and because of this is made a cautery with the cautery that has three handles, for which are six figures of cauterization; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is added on top of one nerve for which there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on top of the cautery powdered broth with oil; after make the patient rest, and let not the limbs be disturbed for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, something happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavile cautery, or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint has been refilled, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient has been healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make pleurisy cauterizations with roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the biggest you can find, and let it be dry, and as big and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and heat it at the fire, and make one cautery between the flank and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower down in the part that is under the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little bit; and one cautery in the breast, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the two sides of the breast after the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as when you are sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancient said that one must use a cautery like a razor, and heat it up and put it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and soon after, there is no more pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or an ulcer comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then add three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One method is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cautery is that you reheat the cautery with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the key that is near the mouse, or the patient's hip comes towards the left side, and let be the elevations which you lift up the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, put the two handles into flames until the key is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and so there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three handles. After that, cure it when it has gained purity after a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not good for dropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the edge of the key.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cauterization remain open to drain impurities for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization for the belly is the clavile that we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-like, according to what is mentioned here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular bones; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not go too deep into the flesh, otherwise the yellowish pus will spread, and let the cauterizations be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Aprés fait two fire cauterizations on each leg, one at the tip of the cutaneous fold and the other below the kneecap in front and behind the leg; let the cauteries be long without healing until the pus is gone; then cure the other cures we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the dwelling place
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestine are impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, then make one great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the cauterization of the circle; and four cauterizations around the anus subtle each like a small nail, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cauterization on the navel, and one cauterization on each rib, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and corrupted by cold and moist gross humors, and are cured as we have said before in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind the almond-shaped piece and in triangular fashion, and one cauterization below the anus. Two others;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is chilled and the meat not cooked, and one sees the face inflamed, then make a great cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and one more on the spleen at each cauterization like a small nail; and let the cauterization remain long. After that, cure the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the swelling which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with Thelul, if it seems to be a flaccid cauterization, then apply the cauterized part to the swelling that has been copped; and let it remain as long as the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that the blood may not flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing with ointments that are beneficial until they are healed; and if you apply a great cauterization on the armpit, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of an unhealed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes to someone, and it is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupt moistures, then you must prove a subtle tent and guard that you know the depth of the tent. Afterward, apply the cauterized part which seems like a flaccid one, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until the corrupted flesh is burned away, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make any fires except in a charred place, and think it is not yet purged; after curing the place until it is healed, if the place is sealed and the matters are removed long ago, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is torn and corrupts the bone at its foundation; and thus as one of those things we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and great flatulence, and does not take shape like a woman's, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization on the kidneys from one side and the other, at the cauterized part like a small nail that we have said before; and if we were to cauterize in the middle, there would be three cauterizations in a line, and they will cause greater aid.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cauterization on the back part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be like small nails according to the form said before.
de la marris	Of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not let anything conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the anus, as we said about the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be like small nails, as we said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the buttock of the hip, and because of this the patient moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the lump of the department vein is there, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the buttock of the hip with a cauterization resembling a circle, and sign in front of the lump around the buttock as it turns, so that the buttock is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olivary region, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the kidneys; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the buttock of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured according to what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient with pills made from fetid substances, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After that, make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization is done in many ways, one of which is: you should make three triangular cauterizations on the buttock of the hip, according to this form, and make good depth and width, and have between each cauterization a space the thickness of a thumb, and let it be an olivary cauterization; sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four, according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, apply the cauterize to the fire circle that we have mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in this way that the circle contains all the hip and all the hairs of the wound are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations on each side where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle three fingers to the left; and let the cauterization be cutaneous, and let the hairs of the wound be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or almost there, make a cauterization where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make another one; and if he knows that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet as well, and was pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery because of the fear of his gaze, and if we see little who uses it; and yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured, and where it applies.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or percussion or excessive blood evacuation, or from something cold and spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be rid of fetid pills or similar things, and have them applied to the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the "point" cautery; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the middle nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow space between their vertebrae when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower part of the back and in no other spine.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	And the cautery should prick each part of the spine equally. And if you see fit, then cauterize around the spine at the piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. After cure, leave it as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in gibbosity which is near a nerve's spasming.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold matter and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make the fire of cauterization around the jointure of the foot, and let it be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at the entire point which is called "point". And if the pains come to just the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauterizations for each part, at all the olive-shaped cauteries; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far away until the sparks of fire are burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to just the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains any pain in the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to just the hips or just the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance for the patient and administer medicines. For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the itching of the scabies
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When itching comes in the armpits, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly so, then it is necessary that when you see it being cured, that he does not scratch that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the faeces descend from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are repaired, and then rekindle at your two hands, and mark with ink below the itching on the bone of the wrist, and at all one sign which is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and he gives off sweet smells. Then rekindle the boils to their place; and command him to hold his hand up so they do not return backwards; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion underneath him and two servants on his hips, and one other on the belly that holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then rekindle again another time until you reach the bone. And be careful subtly so that the boil does not burst when you are doing the cautery; nor should you burn him; and that by this the patient will not die or suffer from another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure; afterwards cure the wound of the cautery with butter for three days until the scarring is removed; afterwards cure other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary that his nourishments be taken away long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And afterwards, when he wants to get up after forty days, have a well-made bandage put on him, and keep it for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and high laughter; and when he has done this instruction, then is he entirely healed. And I will say after this in his chapter the cure by cutting.
de la routure dou ventre	from the itching of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When itches come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery at the third point according to its quantity, and let the spark of fire be burned; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and some of the old ones have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but mark the first sign with ink and make a line across the width above the itch, and another below it, and have your hand inside all the way to the nail-shaped cautery. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the "point" cautery, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pains. If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's good; if not, begin another cauterization on top of it, for such a habit is that it should be changed in the member that is closest to it, therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	A wound
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The wounds are helped sometimes by a fire cautery with great help, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will penetrate the whole patient, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. inside the head to the ninth, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and .ii. on the two horns, and .i. behind on the back of the neck; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the wound is spread out everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauteries on the head that we have said, and one on the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crupie and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the backside, lest you burn them; and at times make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I make a cautery, the greater the aid and the greater the benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as those who are healthy do, because their body is already quite corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of iron. After that, cure with a mixture of flour and honey and other cures until he is healed.
de enfleure	of swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then one makes cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauteries be a little way into the flesh of the bone; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And at times make a cautery and on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless no one intervenes if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "ulbaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine does not do anything, then cauterize it with one cautery, a little deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the bone, until the whitish color is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with a mixture of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colt and blood of alder, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre comes at the beginning and you see it growing, then cauterize it with a cautery that appears as one circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once; and more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some person has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries in piercing; after that leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery until it has the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through the bone, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this manner that the course of the corruption is alleviated. After that cure until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away the members just like fire burns dry straw. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand both heat and cautery, then make small and great iron cauterizers according to what is needed at the site where the disease is; after that, cauterize from all sides until you have removed all the corruption, so that nothing remains but what is healthy. And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil on top of the cauterized areas as long as the fiery scabs are present, and all the corruption has been removed. After that, cure with ointments producing flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this wasting away is sometimes cured with medicine instead of fire cautery in a place; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of corns that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Very often it happens that on the feet outside there arises a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large excrescence that wounds the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are done in two manners. That's to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one cautery just like a vulture's feather, and make it from good iron according to its size so that it can penetrate the excrescence from all sides, and have subtle margins; after that, put it all hot on the excrescence, and turn your hand entirely around the excrescence until it comes to the root of the excrescence; and then let it be thus for three days until it begins to emit corruption; then apply a poultice made from wild mallow leaves, crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the excrescence will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointments producing flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Et si ils sont convertit par défauts du corps, et maintes fois advient en mains et en pieds, si convient que tu y amenistres cautère d'eau chaude; et est en telle manière: pren une cane d'arain ou de fer, ou une pene de voutuel, et met sus le clou et l'alotelul, c'est à savoir pourrez verrues; et met la cane sus si qu'elle porprigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d'eau chaude, et retiens bien ta main, et presse ta main en tournant si que li marge de la cane vienne à la racine du clou, et puisse trouver l'eau chaude voie parfond jusque'à la racine; et souffre le malade un poc la mordication de l'eau chaude une heure; puis le laisse ensi, et il se déracinera tous à tout ses racines. Ensi fai un après autre, tant que tu aurasiches toz ces qui sont au corps, puis les cures des oignemens qui engendrent char.
li cure dou trembler	And the shaking cure is this: take a small piece of bread and butter it, then give it to the patient to eat, and as soon as they have eaten it, they will stop shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake due to cold or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one on the belly, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization; so the shaking will cease, and the patient's health will hasten from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of foul pustules: take a piece of linen cloth and soak it in warm water, then apply it to the affected area, keeping it there until the pus is drawn out; afterwards, dry the wound with another piece of linen.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes boils or foul pustules appear due to corruption within the body, coming from gross and putrid matter. It is necessary at first when they appear that you make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whereby the point is seized by fire, or of long aristologe root, or a lenticular cauterization. And sometimes you should cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut: take a piece of cloth or linen and apply it to the wound, binding it tightly with a string or thread, so that the bleeding may stop; then, if there is still some bleeding, you should make a cauterization on the edge of the wound with hot iron, in order to seal the artery.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occurs great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press hard until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more flows; then take a few small or large cauterizations, all red with fire, and take one, great or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is severed, and place it on that vein where you are holding your fingers, and hold the cauterization there until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it starts bleeding again when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take another one of the hot cauterizations hastilly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched; and take care that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it is not already treated, or by a tight bandage with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and restrained in due order.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies binding tightly with cloths or puts hot things on, or similar things, will not benefit if it is not done skillfully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a surgeon or medicine available, then he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but wet it with cold water often enough that it is very cold, so that the blood is congealed and thickened and staunched; and make enquires ahead for what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of surgical remedies.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or hot medicine, and the uses, causes, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go on with this chapter in the same way so that one may more easily find what they seek.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for that reason it is necessary to be on greater guard.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to take foolish risks. For many types of people come into cures. Some come with such a grave illness that they will soon die from the severity of their disease and the great harm it causes; and one must have fear of these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And from these comes one who gives you his sense and says: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your patients for whose salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear friend, May God give you a good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And now I have completed this chapter as I outlined it by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I outlined from head to foot, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The full-blooded water chief
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too tightly on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a known cause or not.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died from it; and for this reason it seems to me that one should hasten the work less in such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be borne; and it swelled so much that it seemed dead, and this swelling is gathered beneath the bone above the forehead, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a slit in the head as wide as two fingers; and be just as long as two nostrils, until the moisture runs; and look at the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs that the commissures of the head are opened on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this is not responded to: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture forth. After that, close the cuts with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and leave it thus for five days; then remove it, and cure the wound with tenting and anointings, and let the head drain equally, and then let the patient eat dry meat of a little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then at the place where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and the vein according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and come forth a stream of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease which is called "cough" in the sides or at the breast, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is the fire cauterization with what one will cut off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, when you see them cut off, that the patient makes his head go back; then he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient takes his neck all the way to one cloth; then look where the vein bends, and the places on both sides are after the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the places with anointing; then cut off one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the wound comes down to the bone, and it is by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two fingers pass through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood sprays high continuously forth.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the sense, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space with three fingers, then mark with anointing and cut down to the bone; and what is needed for the blood to be let forth is .vi. c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the forehead, cut off what abscesses will not come there, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine comes, and sharp cough, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and old forgotten habits and similar things, and it is not helped by medical treatments or any remedies, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair on temples go back, and feels for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is hardly responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then the patient stretches his neck with certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and applies hot water to the place until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then cut it in an upward direction at the pincer-like folds, and carefully separate the threads that are under each part; and if the artery is thin, then bend it at the tip of the thread, then cut off that part according to the length of two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the blood will not flow out entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of .vi. c/ up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread of strong silk, so that no pus forms before the wound is sewn shut and bleeding stops; then cut off the excess flesh that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the area with a cauterizing knife down to the bone until the skin is cut; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cauterization is aid to finish off the moisture; that's why it is of greater help for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and places a tent well made on top; and when one removes them, there should be care taken to apply dry medicines that produce flesh, and tents, until he is healed; and if there is no chance of getting hold of the artery so far as you are working, then hasten to cauterize with fire, or fill the wound with vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have what is present, then put a cloth on the wound so that the blood congeals, and rub the wound with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is most important and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this fire-cutting instrument in two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to keep their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a space of a finger's breadth, and then when you have signed off on both sides, and you place the hot iron on so that it reaches to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not sewn with this cautery from head to foot; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done there, and you see the face of the patient growing red, and feeling a burning sensation in the forehead as if it were trembling; and so oil are held tight and moist, such that the hairs of paper are fallen, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, thus it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "cure contused" in old times, and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions be as two does all across the forehead downwards until nearly to the nape, and the other two at the two jawbones above the papers, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are at the two jawbones above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and each wound should be the quantity of three fingers across the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to absorb the blood, then bind the sponge tightly to two parts from which it is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape out all the flesh that is between the two cuts up to the syphac which is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this sponge.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and bind in the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting on the other, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the edge cutting towards the fat to the flesh, and the dull edge towards the bone, and bind it until it comes to the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to where the flesh appears; and then make another cut in the middle incision down to the other one; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the joint for the blood taken away; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar on top, and take care that apostemes do not come forth; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great plantain water, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes' humors
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone comes with a great and accustomed cataract, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs falling off, and the forehead in great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these events that those matters and the cataract do not come forth except from many veins, and the true cure that is there, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lift his forehead, then make a great incision across the forehead, and another one of similar width. One inch. And begin from the temple on the left side to the right temple, and be the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtimes; and when the bone is exposed, then stop all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton there, and tent it with linen; then bind it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to let apostemes form hot; when it is bound, then it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that excite flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to excite flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of earwax removal
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls out of the ears is one of the three things: either grains, or beasts, or pebbles of stone or similar things such as iron; or seeds, like jasmine, fennel, peas; or flowing things, like water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When something like a pebble or other thing that doesn't belong in the ear falls out of the ear and doesn't grow there, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the pebble, then distill a small amount of purple oil or sesame oil, and make an extraction; and let it sweat with condiments, and block up the nostrils when the sweating comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times this cure has succeeded in this way; and if it doesn't succeed, then make an extraction with fine pincers, which is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out at the pincers, that's good; if not, then make an extraction with a fine needle of small double-edged scissors; and if it doesn't jump out in this way, then make a cord of thread and bind the head of the cord or the ear canal tightly, and stop up what is around the cord with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the cord; then treat it forcefully, for many times it has succeeded as we have said; and if it does not succeed in this way, then take glue made from the nests of birds, and put in some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and wrap a small amount of cotton around it; then press the glue on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear so that an aposteme does not form there and cause spasms; and the manner of the cutting is that you first heal the patient's cephalic part, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty or bony dependent part; and be the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the pebble, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and the treatment until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is swollen and inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one quarter of a teaspoon held subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then strain it through subtle pincers and a squeezer, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then it is good that the patient uses condiment first and fills the ear with old cotton. And let a cloth be placed on top of that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out for this reason, it's good. If not, then take many pieces according to the length you should hold them and make them light and heat them in the fire; and put one or two perforations in the patient's ear, and lift up from the other side with your fingers and strike another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this piece by piece until the water comes out entirely, and thus it will jump out entirely; and if you see, then take one reed, and push one end into the ear, and the other end imprint with fire until the thickest part of the reed is burned; then refast another section with other reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the piece.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is small and like a mouse or similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, administer an extraction with pincers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of vermin from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear to the sun: if you see no worms, then extract them with subtle pincers; and if you do not see any, take a cane according to this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then squeeze firmly all along the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop around the cane with cotton as I have said in the piece; and if they do not jump out entirely as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the elimination of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be a thick layer of silver or tin below in one small perforation, and above for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument made of well-made tin for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and all that you have of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be in the ear; then put it inside the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled out or nearly so from the ear; and when the patient feels inside, and let the distillation be one point heated over fire thus as you will distill into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the Stuffing of the Ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a perforation in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the stuffing of a wound or a piece of bone inside the ear, and these stuffings sometimes come all the way into the ear, so that you cannot see it; and sometimes there occurs one point going beyond the perforation, and you can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes all the way in, if you cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and as for that which you can see, then you must put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see a visible opilation, then work with all this quarter of the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be cautious and gentle in front and behind, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opilation is of bone or flesh of the ear, then take it with subtle pincers, and remove it lightly, until all the flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilation is all the way in the ear, then take one subtle scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opilation that causes the patient to groan at the sound, then perforate lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten in Egyptian balm.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another wet tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the Flesh of Paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This substance that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tweezers and pincers, and remove a quarter of its roots; then put on the white vitriol broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if any of it peels off, then cauterize the lenticular cautery with a subtle fire, and after the incision, the cauterized area becomes inflamed; and many times they repair, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the Gout
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times, in the eyes, things come that seem like gout in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the symptoms are such: be careful if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it's a light thing to know; then do the same on the large part, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with pincers and remove. If you can't remove without piercing the paper, don't harm the patient; and if the tear is great, then assemble with a seam, and cure until it's healed; and if it's small, don't make any force, because the ointment restores it soon and repairs flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Et if the pus is descending from within the ear towards the upper part, then turn it back with a paper, and let the pus collect in one or two squeezes, and press gently on both sides; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not matter; and when the pus is squeezed out, then apply oil of salted water, and treat the area where the abscess forms until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is formed in the sheets of paper above, and this happens more often with children than with nobody else, and it causes much trouble to their eyes, and they come to the cathartic in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep, and their papers are beneath their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area around the eyes with your fingers and feel the exinach flowing out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of working is that the patient puts their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then place it on top of it; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a medium-sized incision in the moisture up to the spatula, cutting a groove of a width not greater than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and make the skin smooth all the way down until you reach the exinach; and in multiple dispositions comes the exinach from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then pull it out in one piece of cloth wrapped between your fingers to the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to put it into the incision, lest you reach all the way up to the eye and damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then widen the incision slightly until it appears; then pull it out as we said before; then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on the area, and strain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such people who boil and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat it until they are healed. And if an abscess comes to the affected area hot, then treat it with poultices soothing until they are healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper other than the natural kind, and are inflamed, they cause harm to the eyes and bring about mannerisms of diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the papers and conjunctivitis, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to three manners: either by fire cautery together or by medicinal water as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your hand; then turn the paper from the eye to your right hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into all one thread above; and let it be above the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow, and draw up one thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor; then make a cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the unnatural hairs, to the spatula, from the great tear to the small; then pull out one thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of an engraving, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see the paper will be divided in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is someone who needs to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the way up to the spatula on both lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear to the small; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then insert an awl into one of the two angles of the key; then scrape it all off; then assemble the two lips with a stitching using a needle on all one thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the surplus threads stick to the two eyelids at all things that stick, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching anything constraining, because the paper revives with the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is troublesome (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, just as we have described, with three awls separated according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what rises above in small equal forces, according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take an awl with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread at the great tear, and a third thread at the small tear, and assemble between your fingers the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, just as we have described, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment with canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision within according to what I said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises above the paper from the oil, and strain the two canes from both parts together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and become black and hard, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then he will apply more force, and heal until he is sound; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is lifted, and they can no longer prick the hairs; and this is the shape of the .ij. canines that you will do according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a fine needle, and put in one thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the threads and tie them together subtly, and make the length of the threads one palm's length; then order another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the end of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and be under the sun so that the works are revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the needle into the root of the hair next to the natural hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you pull it out above the natural hair; then extract the hair until it reaches up to the edge of the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the paper is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the paper down to the end of all the thread that you have ordered, until the paper comes out from below and you see it by the vision of your eye; then you will pull the paper and the thread, and close the eyes and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin heals; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of the natural beard, and lift it up with that one which you leave, until it is lengthened and then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the greasiness of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or the greasiness comes into the eye, there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cutting or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open the wound, and release the lips from it, and put inside a linen cloth, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use anything in its treatment that dries or constricts. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than the first one; but I advise using things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or althea, and flaxseed cooked, and ointments made from daquilon dissolved in some oil, and wrap it with a cloth, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not harden in the form it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing other than the remedy for this disease, lest it returns to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	About the skin that comes into the eye.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is below and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and incision and cauterization and similar things; and the manner of the work in it is that you take a needle with two threads, and insert it into the skin, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come out in two pieces of skin; then cut the skin above all the needle, and apply a spatula one large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a file and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts on either side of the paper inside; and let the pieces of skin from the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision you have made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has no name "one Greek"; then remove that skin, according to the amount it extends below, from what follows the paper; then join the two damaged parts with a thread of linen; then apply the treatment we have said for soothing medicines and cloths, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from incision or stitching or cauterization, then it is necessary to make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then separate between the two leaves of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an apparatus for every possible way that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	from the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is swollen with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural works, then it is necessary to put the point of a file under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too tight or burning the eye; and make your incision, from which you will cut off that assembled piece, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all that assembled piece is healed, and sometimes in the eye a salty water forms, and it is raised with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen cloth, and place wet wool on top of the eye in abundance of urine; and after three days use vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	About the inflammation of the eye.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the inflammation is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard suppurating boil, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cooked with pincers, cannot be overcome; and both begin to grow gradually from the great eye, and increase little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places their head in your hands, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper to yours hand, then coils the inflammation with pincers of small double-ness, and stretches it up; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or buffalo, and one strong thread on it; and double the point of the needle a little bit, and insert it into the inflammation, and pierce it to the entire length of the needle, and bind the inflammation with one thread and stretch it up, and cut off at the entire root of the eye that surrounds the prunele and the silk to the hair just to the head, then cut off what remains in the root of the eye to the subtle spatula and small forces; and leave the natural skin or eye as it was, so that through the incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes it stops at the onyx alone, and at the thread, as we have said; then one cuts off all the soft spatula of which this is the form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que the spasm doth not touch the flesh and break it, and that the prunelet be not pierced; and after the incision, pour in the oil a little bit of broiled silk, and make a poultice of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure what is needed until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle, and the unguents cannot enter, this appearance of a nail is often treated with medicines; and it comes out like I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the patient's oil, and take the poultice lightly and gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail slightly above, and if you see that it does not shrink and the reason is near, then distill from your mouth into the oil a poultice made of litharge, red powder, and broiled silk, and stop the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as an abscess grows hot, then pour in the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin on the patient's arm hurts in the oil by great injury, then suspend it with an unguent, and cut off a part but not all, lest there be a flow of tears; then distill into the oil red powder made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the skin that grows on the prunelet
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some men's skin grows sometimes a red skin, and covers the prunelet and restrains it above the papillae and turns away from the rear, and seems like a baluster rose; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you oil the eyes, and coil all that skin with unguents suitable for this, and sustain it by force; then cut off the first skin, and go all cutting to the razor until the end, and take care not to bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the poultice be as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small forces that one takes away the sebum, as the form shows after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is complete and all the skin is removed, then apply the oil of broiled silk or distill red powder and similar corrosive medicines into the oil, and put a cotton cloth with egg white on top so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left, and the wound swells up to you, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the hot abscess with soothing things; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do for all skins removed in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each oil according to natural and accidental means through iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Sebel are red veins that are covered on the oil, and tolerate the eye's work and weaken the oil always. It is necessary then that you first look at the oil in which the sebel is, if it is bad, and there is no other disease except the sebel; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend those veins with all the unguent according to your wisdom, and be the unguents subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two unguents by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the unguents with gentle forces, and dry out the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the oil; and take care not to bleed the oil at any points of the poultices, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil green and red powder to corrupt what remains of the sebum.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all of this in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and you are sure of no hot abscess; then continue according to this manner which is before until he is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the pus from the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine with hot water as I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is a sign in him that you must cut open the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then raise it with all the instrument according to this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron in one piece, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is reduced; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wound is sealed, and skin has grown, and the body of the bowels is sealed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemized, and bad accidents do not come, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other sign than to bring back the fistula to the pit of the navel according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by iron and medicines, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and be the key of iron at three angles, and the handle be worn down to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then put it on the bone near the armhole, and withdraw your hand from the oil a little, then turn the whole force so that it pierces the bone and lets the patient feel through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the skin grows and hardens the surface, then the matter goes to the navel; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction from the nose or diminishment, it is necessary that you restrain the patient; then soothe the eyes; then apply leeches or hot iron to heal; then put on oil, made from aloes and aloe, and incense and sarcocolle, and then bind the eyes with bandages and drapes; and the manner of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, four each time, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then bind it firmly over a cloth bandage, and repeat the leeches to heal without causing harm; then remove the leeches and let the oil be restrained day and night, and if the bandages become worn out, it is necessary that you restrain them tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eyes repairing themselves, that is good; if not, then repeat the treatment with bandages, drapes, and leeches until the patient is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	rupture of the vitreous humor
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes to the vitreous humor, then it opens up and appears like a grain of resin, and it's astonishing to see; then if you see it cover, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the point above, then push another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cut the leash of the double thread and tie a part of the vitreous humor around, and bind it well, then pull out the needle and put on oil soaked in egg whites in abundance; and let it be so that the fibers choose with the vitreous humor, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes from the bottom of the eye, and remove the moisture of the albugine and descend the eyes, and enter into it as soon as possible; then restrain it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the conjunctiva that is assembled in the eye, resembling water flowing down, and it's not actually water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you sit the patient on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your two hands, and lift it up until you see the conjunctiva come up to your eyes; then insert it, and do not let it descend and be dislodged by the light, and have the patient see things as they normally would; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the conjunctiva is not prepared as we have said. Then sit the patient between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make a hole in the cornea .i. pot through the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the conjunctiva emerges; and when it has emerged, then distill hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled with honey, and have it treated by another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the likenesses of waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and tie the healthy eye very tightly; then put the paper on the oil in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a hair on the inner corner of the eye, at the part of the lesser eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces in the inner corner of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the distance from the prunele to the end of the nourishment; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just above where the water is, then press down on one path after another. If the water now descends, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his own eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest, and if the water rises the second time, put pressure with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently remove almagda by turning your hand little by little; then put in the eye a little bit of gemstone oil, and leave it there. Then put on top of the oil estoupes or linen soaked in rose oil and egg whites, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, put on a crown made from abundant egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too far into it, but make a subtle hole, then put in almagda, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a bed suitable for sleeping on his back in a dark room; and be still from all movements, and take light food, and do not move your head left or right, and tie him according to his disposition for three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on by the seventh day; and it is not necessary to do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you must delay it, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess comes to be, then you must release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then release the vision and put on a bandage made of linen for covering some days, and be still in that same dark house. And then come out of the house little by little, and convert to your condition; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in his land he did a great wound, by which water flowed, but yet I never saw any such thing in our land nor did I ever read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the shapes of almagda, because he who does not know them sees them; and they are of earth properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three corners are rough.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the knee
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Sometimes flesh grows on the knee, and it is diverse, of which some seem like scorpions to many people; and if there are such ones where the flesh is inflamed with a reddish color, or soft with a pale color. Then, in that one of these fleshes which is soft and not inflamed, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and let him spit on those fleshes, and heat them up; then, as much as you can sustain by the subtle point of a knife from one side, until you see that flesh is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that cannot be cut, then open it with all one of the subtle instruments lightly, until nothing remains; and if it is not inflamed, or if the abscess has opened, then apply the cautery as it is needed; and if it are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize so much that the blood is staunched and all the fleshes are removed, then spit on the knee, or on the water, or with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the knee opens and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is flesh grown in the bone above, whereby instruments do not come to cut: then you must put one linen thread of a moderate thickness, well oiled by hand, with about an inch or less between each knot; and put the patient's head on the thread at his own power, and pull it gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this with children at school, and it is a light matter for one who wishes to do so; then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and know one after the other as we are on the thread. Do this until you see that the knots have corrupted that flesh; then pull the thread, remove the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the knee just as before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put the knee in a cloth bandage for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, whereby one distills oils and medicines on the knee.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle at the head to hold when heating the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the knee
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" grows on the head of the knee, and it becomes great and large, so that it is a visible thing to look at; and therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the flesh, then put hot cautery or medicine on top; and if you delay cutting it until it becomes great, take heed lest it become hard, of reddish color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of reddish color, and you see that you can cut it all off, then empty the patient's head and cut without fear, and cure the wound with drying and binding things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the knee is cut and cleansed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these worked cartilages, it is of little profit, more so than in some people. It is therefore necessary to do as follows with anyone who has this, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together by a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if the lips are already split on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their flesh until they bleed, then join the two lips together by a suture, and bind tight, and sprinkle on top powders of dragon's blood and incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster suitable, and let it be for as long as it pleases itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many people have within their lips abscesses that are hard and resemble grains of millet, small and large; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each one in two, and take each part as a pincer and cut into each part; then apply the leech after the incision with vinegar and broom, until the blood is staunched; and then remove the leech, and cure the wound with drying things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth appears on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the blood flow or the pus; then put on top vinegar and broom, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the sore
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you sit the patient in your hands, and their tears be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and so do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; but if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which we remove the teeth has different forms than he who removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to delay pulling until as long as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance that one does not have an excuse to remove.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull out, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth's tenderness. Many times the pain would overcome the patient, and they thought it was a saintly tooth, and would pull out the good tooth; and yet the pain does not depart at all from them until the bad one is pulled out, for we have already tried this on holy ones; and when you are well certain of the tooth's tenderness, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in every crevice very carefully to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your thumb or use fine forceps at the first notch and notch, so that it is well extracted, then secure the forceps; and the patient's hand should be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side, and then move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and bruised, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the perforations are; and if you strain subtly with the forceps, so that it does not break when straining; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and the tooth will return to the patient through the malice of the root causing even greater pain than the first. And take care that you do not act like the ignorant sages who by their haste and boldness break some time the cart, and bring no benefit at all as we have recounted; but they sometimes bring great diseases through the roots that remain, or because the cart is broken, just as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with vinegar or oil and seaweed; and if blood comes out, which often happens, fill the wound with vitriol broth; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments with which one extracts teeth first should be long-pointed and having large handles, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be made of large limbs so that they do not bend when pulling out, and should be well-made iron, and should have teeth to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a damp cotton cloth with butter on top of the wound for one or two days, until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the patient's hand seems like a gentle beak; and they should also be made inside as a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the cartilage completely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is to say, a pincer, by which it is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by this, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, by which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two horns, it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems great forceps, it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be this instrument so that it cannot break; and knows that many tooth instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise and subtle masters find for themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases and if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, or it may happen that way, so he searches for instruments as I have said, and helps with gestures, this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And should be big and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the wound with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then set it right with all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is new after the original tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be shaped or filed: then scrape; and if it is together with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form of a small beak, and made of very sharp iron at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the edge is worn away and away in a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a special file such as this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth gradually, little by little, over a few days, so that it does not move until it is shaped; then smooth out at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file off the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth decay
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth in front decay, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without spitting it out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but this does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold never changes; and let the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are out of alignment, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place your fingers between the unhealthy teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the surface to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and gently, until it does not move; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the threads of the thread with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy tooth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it in this way as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose or breaks, tighten it with another thread; if it remains and serves in this way for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two unhealthy ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Et when the tooth falls out, then it is put back into its place, gradually and bit by bit, as we have said; and one should not intervene unless one is wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a whale's bone is formed, and it is placed in the gap where the defect is, and it is strained on thus as we have said, and remains and serves for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to bind the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue either by nature or due to the healing of an injury; and the work is such that you must operate on the patient's mouth, with their head in your lap, and lift up the tongue. Then bind the nervous ligament from the wide one, until the tongue is dislocated from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or stiffness, and it is due to a wound, then apply an unguent and bind the ligament; and take care that the incision is not too deep, lest the artery beneath be injured. And when you have done this, then lift up the tongue with a rose-colored cloth or a cold cloth, and put under the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient wear it every night, so the wound cannot suture. If blood comes out, apply vitriol powder to the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for that; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it is yellow or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards blennorhea, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent, and make a small poultice with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on both sides; and if the blood flows to your operation, apply vitriol powder until it subsides, then return to your operation as long as you are treating thoroughly; then lift up the tongue with a cloth of silk or linen, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes there comes into the throat swellings which are called "godath", and one properly calls them ".ij. amandres". And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and yellow color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the evacuation of blood; but let it remain until it becomes dull, and then you will divide it, or it would break on its own; and if it is of white color and red, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to bind, but look first if the abscesses are at rest and are appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with their head in your lap, and operate on the mouth and take the serjeants between your hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, so that it takes its shape; and be of silver or subtle brass, just like scissors:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And then press the tongue under all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the unguent and stick it into the swelling, and treat it thoroughly above what you can; and do not touch anything with cloth, then bind it to the instrument, so that it takes its shape, as if it were a force; and although the head is curved, one way or the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron wire or awl:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then bind it with pincers, so that it takes its shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it should be cauterized on one side and the other; and when you have cauterized one of the swellings, then cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold water, and a cloth of silk, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with hot water, or cooked apple peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is subsided; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the .ij. amandres, then cauterize them thus as the .ij. amandres are cauterized.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside the throat, which is to say one abscess of small sense; and I had already well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two rains through the two holes of the neck. I hastened then at once, and applied an unguent to one side, then treated it thoroughly, and took out a great portion of pus; then re-treated the other side through the other hole of the neck, and operated on the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards applied the unguent to these abscesses, and bound part of it, and only a small amount of blood flowed out; and thus the conduit of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed again and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained; and I left these parts, and only know what God made of them after me.
de l’uve	of the uve (uveitis)
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the uve swells up and is long and inflamed, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and when it is below the fat and rounded, it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscesses are appeased, and she is subtle, then it is necessary to bind it; and the one who is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or yellow or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision on it. For there is great peril for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument which we have made a reminder of earlier; then apply the unguent to the uve, and treat it below, and bind it with one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the .ij. amandres. And it is necessary not to bind more than the superfluous part that is outside the natural term; for if you bind too much, you will cause pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. amandres, and cure it until she is healed. And if the patient has fear of binding, then it is necessary to use trickery for the cauterization of the sense that fears; and the manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts their head in your lap, and then presses their tongue to the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confesses with hot water, so that she is not too thick nor too clear; and use the mechanism of this instrument, so that it takes its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d'une cuillier, et met l'estruement a tout la medicine sus l'uve; and let the hair on the head be long or trimmed as one places medicine, just like those of a quiver, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the swelling; and the patient should lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine inside, so it does not descend to the throat, and then bleed; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the swelling, for half an hour, until you see it take shape and the medicine's blistering be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on the cane above, until the cotton covers the swelling; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. If you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, then start again, and after the cautery, wrap around the swelling with a cotton cloth soaked in oil, and clean all that surrounds the medicine; and be cleansed with cold water, and be cured of gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, not to mention the cautery; if it is cured with fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and I put a little bit of oil, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument carved according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be made of silver or lead, and one of the keys should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the swelling through the tube, until the swelling is mortified; after, repeat this often, until the swelling dries, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the aposteme's heat, for many things happen then; and don't do it too soon before the aposteme's heat declines. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a quill-shaped eggshell inside the patient's head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh on the mouth, and this is good care together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it appears at the throat as a bone or fish spine, or nothing; so it is necessary that you try to see what you can and press the tongue onto the instrument in the sun, until you see the thing move; and that which does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in their stomach; by chance if the thing is forced out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread; and tie the sponge to a thread, then pass it through; and when it comes up, it will be absorbed, then you will pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take a lead instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life leave him, nor insert the bone inside; and be careful that the patient inserts the instrument, for this is how the thing is forced out or is released; if they push it down, or pull it back out along the entire instrument, until it is fully out.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the spittle of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	There is no medicine for spittle, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, after you press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the spittle, pull it out slowly along a small string or fine tongs like those suitable for this purpose. And if this does not work, take a carved tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then put the tip of the tube into the patient's mouth and make it so many times. And if the patient is bothered by water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open their mouth, and pour it out without swallowing, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the spittle feels the water, let it go.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not go as we said, then subfumigate the patient with asefetide, at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the swelling; do this many times, for it will come out without effort. And the manner of fumigation is to take a pot where there are hot coals, and have the pos covered by a perforated cloth, and in that hole be the keys of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts their head of the tube into their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the spittle; and now the spittle will go away, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer from thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and thus there is need for it to come out through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the spittle is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs to help it enter the throat; and it has a resemblance to a surgeon's beak, and has an asperity of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many similarities of abscesses, according to what memory brings forth from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is similar itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are at the bone or in the flesh. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the bone jointed are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if one has an abscess that should not be pierced until the swelling is less according to its completion; and there are some that need to be pierced when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, such as those that occur at joints. For when abscesses come at joints, and one leaves it until it is all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, causing contraction in that member.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, and that is when the pain is assuaged, and the departures of fever, and the diminishing of pain and redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the aposteme, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit where it will depend on the location of the aposteme, and where it appears to move; and the perforation should be long enough in the body, and if the apostemes are at hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no inflammation.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that are inflamed, according to the affected member. And when apostemes are in a charnut location, so move that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, the body would be lengthened with venom from it, and filled with much waste; and by chance harden the lips and bottom parts of it. And for some apostemes that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need. And it is necessary that you make small perforations for small apostemes, and large perforations for great apostemes, and many incisions according to the likeness of the greatness of the aposteme; and if there are such apostemes where it is necessary to cut out the core, and cover; when it has become as one flagon, and is exhausted, then make as you do with babies: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those from which one cuts like the foliage of myrtle, like apostemes of anger; and if there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those who do not have a head, like a soft superficial aposteme, it is necessary that you pierce thoroughly; and it is necessary when the apostemes are great, and they have gathered much pus, and you pierce, so as to draw out only some of the pus in that hour, then stop the aposteme until the next day, then draw out nothing more above; do this many times with great care, until all the pus comes out; especially if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carrying child, or small children, or old decrepit men. For the spirits sometimes quiver with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware. Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your aposteme, then dress the wound, and see if the wound from the aposteme is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a great apostemes, and there are many perforations, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut out part of the skin from the aposteme, and you have covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs at your work, then apply cold and soft water, and a wet cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, then apply governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is winter, and the flesh or apostemes are very nervous, it is necessary that you put on wet tents and cloths soaked in hot wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the flesh is fatty, then apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the aposteme and dress it and care for it, as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of apostemes: for I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of apostemes, and see here the chapter.
des soros	None (it seems that there is no text to translate)
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the core of the head comes from small apostemes, and are like us who are in nets, just as a spider is in its web, and there are many likenesses. There are some that are fat and such that have moisture like poultices; and if there are those which are hard and stony to cut into, and where the artery does not make contrary. And the works of the incision are that you test all one instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes hereafter, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then drain it above the long part. And when the moisture is exhausted, then scrape without leaving anything but the skin that contained that moisture, for it will return again if you leave anything; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and let it be until the next day; and this will happen to those who are left from the night. And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that there is no longer any moisture at night; then cure the wound with ointment in a way that is suitable, until it is healed. And if the apostemes hold one fat nut, then cut it according to this form, from the long part; and throw out your needles, and scrape off all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery makes contrary, do what I told you afterwards. And similarly with the aposteme if it is stony, and of cutting and curing as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision above the stony and moist aposteme is lighter, for it contains less blood. And if there are some of these apostemes that have no moisture at all, such as one aposteme I cut from the head of an old woman; and I found the aposteme to be like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if one had done anything with it, one would have made just as much of a wound as with a stone. In other apostemes coming from the head, except for those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the incision should be always at its most dependent place, in order to allow the pus to issue forth; and the cure should be done as necessary.
des scrophules	None (it seems that there is no text to translate)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these apostemes occur at the neck and below the shoulders, and sometimes in the armpits, and occasionally elsewhere on the body, and they are many and intertwined with each other. And each scrophule is properly located within its own skin, just like the nodules and apostemes of the head, as we have said; and there are many likenesses to these scrophules. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and refuse to obey health. Therefore, when you see one with a good disposition for cutting, and it has the color of the skin, and is quiet on all sides and not inflamed at the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep; then it is necessary that you cut above it, and scrape off each part, and leave the two lips of the wound to be treated with poultices, if you need them, as we have said in apostemes of the head; and treat it little by little, and make sure you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor should it be a spatula that is too long or cuts too much, lest your hand escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Et se tu copes la voinne ou l'artere, and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound vitriol powder or some powders that remain blood and restrain the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is appeased and the wound is softened and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your indication if there are any small scrophules remaining, cut them off and remove them. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrophule, then do not cut that scrophule at its root, but tie it with a double thread, and let it fall without harm; then apply the wound with old Egyptian cotton soaked in oil, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the whole scrophule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, then since there will be no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrophule. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root, and pull forth, and sew as we have said. Those scrophules that hold superflity, pierce where it appears to decay; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then administer tents with oil and similar things, so that what remains of corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment pouring out flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	None! It seems you just provided a single word: "de squinance". If you'd like to provide more text or ask me to translate something else, feel free to do so!
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the incision in the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not make use of it by doing so, because all the veins and the swollen parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the armpit, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to escape the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, we should cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision of the syphilis, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and that one is suitable for the cutting of the epiglote, since there is no flesh and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire length, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the pus from the channel which jumps forth through the torn part, and by the defect of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed about which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all around without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one does not do this just yet, until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect leads on.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut out the epiglote because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they command to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young woman take one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the armpit;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided it away from the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was well.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there was no harm to the young woman except that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her usual state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not necessary to work fiercely except in the one who is small, and probe and search through all the intervening parts.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as hard as a lump of fat, and is not able to move in any way, then cut it, just as one cuts flesh, and treat it with all the care necessary if there is no abscess.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search thoroughly, and heal it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of the flesh
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many kinds of flesh are, which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between flesh and abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is warm and feverish, until the boils have passed, and the corruption is completed; then the fever and warmth subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the flesh there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a greenish-yellow liquid, and becomes swollen.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and of various colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you first probe and examine it with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will come or whether it is a cyst which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The manner of inquiring into abscesses is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly, slowly, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the instrument, and take care in case it breaks off.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture comes forth, regardless of its color, then do as I said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the instrument no moisture comes forth, know that it is fat, then do it in a cross shape, and take hold of pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part, and keep the coat where you find it to be intact with the help of the needle.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it whole, then remove it in pieces so that there is nothing left.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, then the abscess will come back many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if a small part remains and the blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on soothing things hot to the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the abscess is great, then cut off the two lips of the wound, and cure it with what is left of flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is against you or another obstacle makes you hasten and use the lead of vitriol mixed with water, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound purrs, and cease the flowing of blood; then return to the operation on what remains of the needle.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Behold the forms of the instrument instruments, and they are three in manner: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are three quadrants which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, for encircling abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles with which one sews suture, and they are of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most tried and proved to be black for encircling the swellings of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they are three in manner: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the onyxes are many in likenesses, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are onyxes which have two swellings of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And there are onyxes which have three swellings, and they are also of three kinds; and there are onyxes which have two swellings, and onyxes with only one swelling, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these with which one works are cutting, and there are some that do not cut very far except from one side, from which one scrapes the abscess, because it is not necessary to cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these instruments are wrapped in cloth, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they are three in manner: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one does not use them much except in a place that is well-closed, such as joints, and arms, and shoulders, and at angles, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scraper of fistula, according to this form, with which one stops blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one puts it sometimes in the place where the veins come together and the arteries, and sometimes they are bent according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like a woman's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must be treated according to this form of the line b up to 7g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that brings forth flesh, then stitch together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cure it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the breast sags down and is marred by its size just like it is in women, then do it in two seams above, by two similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one is joined to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and put in what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the hemorrhaging of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it stay until the remaining flesh and fat are consumed, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	(No translation needed, this appears to be the title of a section or chapter in the text)
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulas or boils with ridges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture therefore need to be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it stay until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with oil suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	(No translation needed, this appears to be the title of a section or chapter in the text)
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is swollen, many abscesses come forth, and it also happens that the vein becomes inflamed and abscessed.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this way when it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it at your fingers, you will feel one strangeness; and when it is because of the vein, then it seems to be pushing forth in appearance.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and all the more so when it is located under the armpits and inguinal regions and at the neck and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is then necessary to prepare the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also prepare it, and in him who has an aneurysm bursting above the skin of the long one.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform the incision on the nodes, and depart beautifully the artery from the tendons, until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle below the one, and make it pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then prick the place that is between the two ties of an introducer until the blood vessel opens which is there, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment as instructed by Bowe, until the tie falls.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with ointment what is suitable for this, until he is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is for the sake of letting blood, then it is necessary that you stain with your hand as much of the abscess as will reach to all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle below the place that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and there be one double thread, so that you pull it to the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of the two parts to the two heads of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the threads do not come out firm, then rebite another needle all along one thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cover the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cover the superfluity of the blood and leave what is tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also just as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come on the nerves when they are fatigued or from too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the joints and the elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it exists in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one exerts oneself strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depth of the body, but rather below the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it spreads well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance there would be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and the one who is on the head or on the forehead, make the skin to blister.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then hold it with pincers and cover it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suspend it on the needle, and scrape it, then cut it and assemble the wound to the seam, and apply treatment until he is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great hives hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large swellings; and there are some small ones and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I have seen one man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open and oozed moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work of the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic area is white and moist and has a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	so that you cut it open wide at the scabbiness, and be present with the cautery by fire. For when cutting comes too great a flow of blood, and if the patient's blood vessel is swollen, then hasten to apply the cauterizer;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a well-made linen thread and bind the arthritic area as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the linen thread until the arthritic area is cut open, and choose by him without great labor; and if the roots are large, then fear to cut open as well for the belly, but you can still cut off half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut open the arthritic area which is of bad color and poor sense and regards milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is over
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the wound comes from a cauterization of a cut or a syphilitic ulcer, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it often does in other ulcers, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the ulcer of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on the belly so that it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press on it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is from blood, then it appears by these signs as the abscess great and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is from inflammation, then it is sore when touched, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	So it is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold his belly firm and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he commands you to place it gently between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place where you have signed on all sides.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stretch half of the abscess above to the great incision;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let the knot be well secured.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work on the half of the abscess stretched above the knot, and put your right index finger, and pierce the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it stuck to the knot, then loosen it, and push the intestine forward from the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, take hold of it with the incision, and cut away the superfluity.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery makes you resistant or the vein, then go around nicely, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two fine threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be as long as it can open up, and cut out the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and open, then cure it as is necessary, and clean the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is necessary, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the similarities of sore, and how one should work it with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure by fire; and say that the sore should be left to itself in the marrow, and great caution is needed in the cure. And the old ones say that when sores are in a place or can be reached as if they were in the very bones, and in the hips, and in similar places, you must entirely remove it when it starts; and when it is large and old, do not approach it, for I never saw one cured; nor has anyone before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile at some point; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient one good place to do the work; then take your needles or sore and clean it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run freely and press well the place with your hand or something, and if the flow of blood makes you resistant to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize as long as the blood is flowing; then cure with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only eclites; and one should not touch iron on these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as inflammation of the belly and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and he only has dropsy without any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	lift the patient straight up onto your hands, and have him press his belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the abdomen; then take the spine-shaped instrument according to this form: And be cutting from two parts. at a point, and yet not so deep that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and not be able to hurt it.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if it's necessary, then cut into the belly three fingers' breadth below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers' breadth; and if it's due to a tumor, then it should be on the right side, and it's not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities don't run to that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bind it, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the flesh as in shearing at the quantity of an inch or less; then pierce the flesh until the spatumile comes to the eight vein, and that is the place of the water, then treat it further, and put this instrument which has the form: And it resembles a silver chain, and is made of light iron or archaic, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and are cut off like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which the writers cut with a pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top of it is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then descend now on top of the instrument; empty it then one-third or two-thirds, for if you empty more than what's needed at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls asleep, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the purpose that stops the hole which is on the flesh, as I have said, that you pierce in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from these things, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do this for a few days, and take care not to drain out too much water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then the cure of burial or sand will be needed, and by excessive sweating or bathing in hot water and sun, and he should abstain from drinking; and treat with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born who does not have a foreskin on the penis, or it is small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, then one should pierce at all times .i. spatumile very subtle according to this form: then put on the foreskin .i. fine cloth of linen, and bind and keep it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to do urine, then take off the cloth, and do urine, and then put it back; and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes out does not disturb the closure.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose foreskin is small should be treated with the cloth of linen, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their foreskin in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot discharge because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and then lifts the head of the penis and cuts it similarly to the shape of a feather, so that the foreskin can open in its place, as it should; and take care of the bleeding which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and cure the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	These blisters often come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should take them with a very fine needle, cut and scrape all of them away, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure with divine ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blister is malignant, with foul color and discharge, it is necessary to apply a cautery. When you have cut it away, and the blister is on the penis, and has part within the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the blister which is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside part. For if you cure them together, the head of the penis will not be sure to avoid being pierced, and there will be more corruption and blackness in his penis and groin; so it is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from the rind of pomegranates and beeswax, and then cure with other remedies until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes in two dispositions together: that is to say, at the bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a linen strip into the opening of the penis and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin around the foreskin is roughened at the head of the penis which have not been circumcised, or it has due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary to cut away with a hair-like instrument until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis be released from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if this is a grievous thing to do, it is necessary that you cut away with a very fine instrument some spot from the head of the penis and skin; then carefully remove between two, and put in a thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the removal of continuity as are other wounds; however, when we do this work at our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the easiest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not instruct their children in circumcision, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and physicians who perform circumcision around a piece of linen, with forceps, and all in one new cloth; it was necessary to cut through because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And then it is necessary to cut again, and there is double pain, and the point of the member is not assured by the mundification; and at the mundification of the wound by chance the iron escapes, and the work is spoiled, and many times it happens that they do not need mundification and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mundification which is done with forceps throughout all the ligament of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forceps cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one place and another; but the thread should be very thin around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything more than simply wrapping the thread around the penis, and then make him sit down in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then make it sit between your hands all straight, and point the forceps between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow gently with a key, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then mundify well the filth that is gathered there, then tie the signet of a double thread, then tie below one piece to another ligament; and hold it with two thumbs through the second loop in the pouch and the right index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the key quickly and pull the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on and on a cloth glued with a yolk of cooked egg tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rosed oil, and leave it there until the next day, and then cure with another remedy until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forceps for mundification is this: the two jaws should be held and should be cutting, and should be the same size as each other.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of the mundification is when the iron within flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the ligament makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts for three days, and what is below the penis becomes inflamed, then let it be so until the abscess is pacified, and then scrape it lightly; then cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound of sudden powder that we have spoken about in dealing with powders, and if one cuts too much beyond measure, and it goes above, so as not to harm; treat it then as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is caused by constriction of the kidney, or blood clotted, or bowel obstruction, or childbirth, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone or the curvature of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent forward at the knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should stretch out his belly from above down to the back, and have the patient straighten himself as much as he can; and then the curvature of the bladder is constrained by the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form: and be made of subtle silver hair, like a bird's feather; and be the cane one palm and a half long, and be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the siringue; and cut off the excess of the wool and put it just up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg, and have the patient sit on a stool, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then put the siringue lightly on the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the mouth; then insert the siringue before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's sensation coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or guide is twisted; then pull out the thread all along the wool piece and piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and repeat the siringue until the bladder is emptied, and have the patient eased.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When fluxes or blood come into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see waters and medicines dripping, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the lips are pierced so that the medicine can be such that it stops well the penis without addition, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and insert when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw on the drawing tube that is inside; if you will draw out the moisture with the syringe, then pull back strongly on the drawing tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or horn, and the head is higher up; then below lies one piece of skin or the seam falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture into it that you see catheterizing the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the one end of the moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand onto the bladder with all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the reins, and all signs, and which stone one should work on in size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder in children happens more often than in grown-ups, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and greases the patient's penis, and makes him go many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones fall to the ground; and children's healing is much lighter until they are three years old, and it is very grievous in old age, and it is in middle-age men, between youth and old age; and the cure is more gentle for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purge the patient by catheterization, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders the quest for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and throw him down and move him to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from high up; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely declaiming downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in place, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't fall when touched all over, then moisten your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your two median fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and insert them into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your fingers and push it out where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out with his right hand the fingers above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the fingers in the part where you are doing the cutting; then put the spatula copant, which is the form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between those who is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the left side of the naughtiness; and be straight on the stone, and your feet should be there or at the foundation, and be the size of the cross so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the pressure should be on the foot that is at the foundation, so it jumps out without much effort; and know that there are stones or rocks with angles and edges: if it is rough to come out; and there are others that are smooth, similar to a glass, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	To that stone which has angles and edges, make the shape larger; and if it doesn't jump, then you must strain above with the pincers which are like a file at the head, to strain the stone so it doesn't escape; or you put beneath .i. subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then open .i. small hole in the pertus, and if the stone is decorticated, then strain it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more stones, then put the largest one first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then draw it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, you must make it smaller, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately in such a way that the flesh cannot cohere; but nevertheless strive to draw it out, or to break it up with pincers, until you have drawn it out by pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, then anoint the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and strain it, and place a damp cloth on top in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not release the tie until three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release him, then arise the patient very well from oil and water, then anoint him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot apostemes come to the wound and ulcers, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and are retained by this way so that urine is not released with it: then put your hand into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and destroy it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then lift the wound with vinegar and oil and seaweed, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips, and gather the medicines on the bed.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say, that you repeatedly cut it, or be excused from cutting because of this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one fire:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the rod in your hand at the stone point by point, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. So it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the penis meet the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, and release the tie, and purify the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that stones are imprisoned in women, and if it ever does, then the cure is grievous, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who bares herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman who knows this art by hand; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply situated than the stone of man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows, and at great cost find one, and if you cannot find one, then seek out .i. chaste subtle mirror; and the present one a well-informed midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command about the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her hand on the foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then constrains it under her hand, and recommends that she puts her hand on the foundation with the patient, and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the crease, where the flesh appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her hand above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then put the right hand in the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; so learn the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood flows, then put vitriol powder on the wound, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men, to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows, and it's from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue with this, and leave the stone alone and do not try to move it, lest the patient die; then care for the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is exhausted.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Wet white sac is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white siphac, which is below the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "siphac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it's the skin of the testicle between the white siphac that we have said; and this does not happen unless it is so.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this wetness is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and spreads this matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellowish, or it is without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is the white siphac that we have said, then it is the abscesses that return, about as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is the abscesses that return with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white siphac, one feels it well; then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, examine all around the quadrangular outline, from which its form appears as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the outline, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be made whole according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then bind a cloth on his back, on something about a foot high, and place many cloths under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right side, and stretch the rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the testicles from its long part until just below the navel, and make your incision all straight down to the white siphac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the white siphac with an aqueduct to one large opening, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the white siphac upwards; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the siphac itself; cut it into pieces or as is, on its own side, subtlety, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the egg jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the siphac; then assemble the two leaves of the skin of the testicles into one seam, and then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you loosen the vessels that are suspended, doubting the corruption of blood; then cut the testicle to the whole suspensory part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two sacs; then cut the other part equally as you did the first one, and then stop the bleeding, and put a linen cloth dampened with rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another linen cloth dampened with wine and oil on top of it, and place it over the two testicles, and cover it with doubled cloths, and tie it up in the form of this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and use woolen cloth according to this likeness and have them sewn together in the gusset of the braies, and one of the strings takes up from the foundation to the back, and the other at the part of the navel; and the other chief is placed over the two armpits, and be all assembled in a restricted manner in the loop of the braier.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this sac is treated with a fire cauterization in place of iron, and it's that you take one subtle cauterizing tool, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white siphac that contains the water is revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that siphac with your fingers, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauterizer.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have reached the end; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salvaged; and keep watching out for corruption of blood, and take care with the ironwork as well.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or corruption of blood or another thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that this wet sac is bad,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	then make the patient sit on a low stool; then pierce the abscess in the part below to the whole spatula wide, and place the perforation from the length of the body; and be large the openings, so that all the water may flow forth.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow forth, then cure it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white membrane does not let the water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a probe or the instrument used to drain the water from hydrocephalus, as we have described; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after 6 months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this sac there are many apprehensions, because it seems to me that one must not leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the testicles; and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It's to know that it comes from bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance is an abscess grievous and pained, and of a foul color, and sometimes comes from the absence of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to the absence of an artery, then it is known by the warm appearance of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not seem good that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is caused by the swelling of a vein is known by its appearance when pressed with the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and it can be well done according to this appearance and on other similar things.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the key of the coils, then lift it up and pull the thread of white silk and release the suspender from all parts of the coil.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the coil is already tied with these knots, then it is necessary that you untie the coil and cut the thread.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is stuck to the silk or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension and cut again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the knot is at the end, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the coil, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with a linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the coils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch of grapes, with the softening of the coils
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if the patient grievously complains when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is just as frightful as the previous one
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspender of the coils down to your fingers
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the thigh, and tighten the masters, and stretch them properly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut at the spatula-like instrument with a wide traverse around the vessels, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert an awl where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came forth, and tie it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisters.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then cure the wound as with others who are wounded in the bowels, so that no vessel is left that could nourish one of the coils.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for then there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come forth blood, then it is necessary to draw out the coils from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the thread of silk
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The event of this thread is by the section that comes from the silk, or the extension above the belly in the part of the kidneys, whereby the intestines descend from that thread to one of the coils.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this thread is either from the silk or from its extension, and it comes in two ways of many causes: by percussion, or leap, or bray, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the silk, are that it happens gradually and slowly, little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal all the way to the very bottom, because the silk presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the silk, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of abscesses beneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body being torn away from the silk.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine, and are retained in this way, and cause great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron cautery, there is fear, which is why it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert his finger into the intestine within the wound, if he can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then have him lean back on his neck between your hands, and lift up his hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then raise the key above, and cut all the skin of the coils from the length.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert inside the leaves of the needle according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the silk that is under the skin of the coils, until the white silk thread is fully exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then place your index finger in what is between the coil, between the white silk thread that is under the skin of the coil and the second silk thread.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and depart what is behind the coil, and between the second silk thread; and then move your hand to the right within the key of the coils, and raise the white silk thread high on your left hand, and lift up the coil to all the silk threads towards the edge.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the coil upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the binding.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your fingers if there is anything of the intestine wrapped or white silk thread, and if you find nothing, then place it under the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take an awl with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the silk, which is after the skin of the coils; after the edge, then cut off the knots that appear from the threads, as long as there are 3 threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the silk, which we have said is under the skin of the coils, with a strong bond of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the knots of the threads and tie them together with a strong bond of two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in, lest the abscess should come forth.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the ligament directly under the first long ligament two finger-widths away from that one, and then leave a space of about the width of a thumb between these two ligaments.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then do the same with all the other ones according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the scrotum, as far as the blood flows and the bowels are released, just as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then wrap a wet cloth in oil and put it on wounds, and I will tie the ligament that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time should you cauterize the white space that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this has happened many times, and leave the ligament until it heals on its own; and if it does not heal quickly, then raise the temperature with hot water, and put what we have said on top, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who dared to do the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones say that it is done in the same way as the ramie cloth that is wrapped around the body, in this manner that you bind the vessels, after shaping them slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	At no time does a rupture come in the inguinal region, as we have said, and open up the swelling; and none of the intestines should protrude to the scrotum, and if any do, it is little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if it stays too long in this position, the wound or swelling will grow, until the intestine protrudes.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the swelling that is in the inguinal region, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and at no time is treated with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the rupture that has inflated to the width of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the swelling that is under the skin and pull it out, then take the rat and place it on top of the apparent swelling.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent swellings on top of the rat's head, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then extract the head of the rat, and do not cut nor stretch the swelling in any way, as I have shown you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then treat it as you would a wound. And when you cut the threads, let it not be sullied and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the contents inside are softened, and it is a sight to behold; and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin that has grown above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the soft skin at three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat it as one would other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread comes out.
dou chastrement	of the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I should not speak of it at all in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one, to have the doctor respond when asked about a cure, and to provide an answer; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the scrotum are softened and relaxed; then we take hold of them with one hand, until they are remitted and you no longer feel anything. As for the chastisement by cutting: it is necessary to wash the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum against your left hand; then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle once, when you have thoroughly cauterized them; and leave some space between the swelling and the fine swelling that is over the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one done by attraction, because at the attraction there remains perhaps something of the scrotum, whereby the beast desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodite is in two ways in humans: one way is that between the two testicles appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and sometimes urinates. And the other manner is in women, and has on the finger as much as a penis and two testicles. And the treatment of man and woman is to cut off the excess flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of tetinegine (not recognized)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tetinegine is a mass of flesh joined to the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It's necessary to wash away the excess tetinegine with your hand or fingernails, and cut it slightly; and don't go too deep into the wound, lest bleeding ensues, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and there is another lump that grows at the mouth of the womb, and fills, and perhaps bursts forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow's udder, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It's necessary to cut it, as we have said about tetinegine, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics (not recognized)
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the natural state of a woman's body is not perceived, or if her uterus is small; and it occurs by birth or accident due to disease that has come upon her; or it is caused by a mass of flesh, or from the subtle or thick swelling, and it is done in front, sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it hinders conception, childbirth, and perhaps also menstruation; and the knowledge of this is recognized by the examination of the belly. If the swelling is nearby, you should go to your right or left. If it is from the subtle swelling, and it is near the two lips, you must hasten and do this: put your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spread out her legs; then let the two lips be formed until the subtle swelling is gone, and let it be above the swelling; then take linen, soak it in oil, and place it on the swelling, and make the woman rest at home each day, so that she cannot get better. And if the swelling is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a mirtle leaf. If the swelling is of new flesh, you should suspend it with an onion and cut it; and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as acetate, dragon's blood, and incense, together with an egg; then administer a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be long enough, and administer a linen tent; then let it be cured by other cures until it is healed. And when new flesh comes in the uterus, you must cut it according to this method, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For at the enchanted aposteme that is in the uterus, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Piles
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Haemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without a natural outlet, and when old, become ulcerated; and we have said in our division about their likenesses and signs, and I will now say those that receive curation. I say that haemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are completely inflamed in the rectum, and there is no feeling of them, except through cure by iron. Those at the mouth of the rectum, which can be felt, are those that can be cured. It is therefore necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then set the ulcerated area on tongs, and wrap it around its roots, then powder it with medicines restraining blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grape skin and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make .i. poultice on her back. And if it stays, that's good. If not, make ventouses on her back and breasts to cause no pain; then take linen, moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. And when the abscess is quiet, cure the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, so it must be covered as I said about the ulcer; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the rectum, such as chancre and hot abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in my division. It is therefore necessary for me to say about this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the rectum, which is not one of those abscesses that form a boil. And if you wish to know how to work with iron, see first if the abscess is acute at its onset, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so that you can see it. Then do not hasten to lance it, but make it quiet until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or one large one for them to lean against, and support their back and assemble their legs at the parties of the far leg; and spread their thighs, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good bandage. Then secure the cloth on the right side, and apply the instrument that works on the mouth of the rectum, from which this form comes; and it is necessary that when you see me applying this instrument, you place the first layer in so that you can know the depth of the rectum, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the rectum with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve the patient. And it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a gentle touch on it by hand, it is necessary to cover it at the head, or at the spatula-like place; and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary that you put wet cloths in rose oil or green oil into the wound, or in water that has been cooked with lilies and Aristologe, long so much as it takes to be cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment, until it is healed. And sometimes one opens the rectum and the wound by means of a syringe of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies, and Aristologe; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is returned to the rectum, it is necessary that you take care not to work with iron, but cure it as we have said in my division.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs, that is, when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to give birth; then hasten the child to issue forth quickly; then you will know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under his head, and the afterbirth with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child issues forth soon; for when it descends onto its head, it brings the afterbirth with it, and cleanses the rectum of its superfluities by good purgation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or on the body or the arms, or on the belly, or in some other way, and is converted by chance onto his neck, or through other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out under his head through natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have the women hold her; and anoint her with oil or fenugreek cooked in water, and then give the midwife between her thighs this small spatula-shaped instrument.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the afterbirth, and tie it off at its tip until the moistors that are inside come out; and take hold of the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mush in oil of sisanth; then make her press down and strain through a cloth, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: now the child has issued forth. And if the two hands come out, then it is necessary that you gently pull them apart bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then tip the stool back down to earth, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut off the hands at the join that is before placed here, and extract the child, and pull it out evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	The issue of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it springs just to the groins, if the command is to press, and makes the fat bulge with condiments;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it leaps forth, as God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not leap forth as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not leap forth as we have said, then take mullein leaves, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the natural shape of the woman inside and outside this unguent.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in cold water down to just below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, put a clyster of myrrh on her, and place it underneath, and let her be for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her open and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child on her knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, then place your hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be careful on his neck, and let his feet dangle down, and be supported on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then press his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until she is prepared downward;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then push in your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and help the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold as long as the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out one hand's length away
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and gently lift her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the mullein mixture that I have told you about;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and help the child according to its natural shape, and make her open, and instruct her to take hold as long as the child emerges further.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and have spread out her hands, and her face turned towards the back of her mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	it is necessary that the midwife take hold of its hand, then turn it little by little, and help it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then put on the natural mullein mixture of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and instruct her to take hold; and make her open.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner for the whole second stage
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes forth in this way for the whole second stage, then cut the umbilical cord at your finger's length, until the afterbirth is empty.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child looks up at its face and neck, then cut it off from the mouth so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside as long as you have placed it so that it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take hold some time;
adonques si istra legierement.	then it becomes easier.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a rare thing, and do not live unless they are named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are divided by the cord which separates them, which is tied to the mouth;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes come out naturally just like one's own son, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out quickly, then do as we have said, and be subtle, and make what she makes soon and easily.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus for the salvation of the mother.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of God's glory,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen to her.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so do as it becomes.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of a dead or stillborn child as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to operate by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know whether the woman has natural virtue, and does not have an accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be careful on her back, and that her knees be inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the attendant holds her by two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mullein from althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the midwife's hands with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour them into the mother gently, then take one or two and pour in those things that are convenient for this purpose.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take heed if the child is prepared to descend on its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	then tie the ligatures in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on feet, then tie it or pinch it and at the crooked places.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that you hold the ligature with your right hand, and place the cord between your knees of your left hand, and pour in all your hand gently, and tie the ligature in one of those places we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and that is the form of the ligature:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then tie another ligature opposite it, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch equally on both sides, moving from one side to the other, so that the joints may come out, and the incisors of teeth may hold them in place, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some part remains, then anoint the ball with some of its oil and pour it into that part, and draw away the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is none left, then place this incision or higher and do it until everything comes out whole.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned for constriction.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so you must wrap around once with a cloth, until everything comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then bind at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do it in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is thin in the birth, or it has a sharp or pointed cranium assembled.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	so you must place the spatula-like spine between your legs and bend the head and extract the sharp point.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will cut it with the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then draw out the bones with forceps,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps forward and it is strained at the forehead, so that it is split open, until the moisture which is in the birth comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the birth is light and the direction towards the mouth of the mother is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is thin in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract him to one cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and loosen the belly or breast until the moisture that is there flows.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	so put the ball of your hand into the mother's private parts and draw it just to the mouth of the mother.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then place one or two incisions, and draw it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to trouble oneself.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	rather it is necessary to apply moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the plaster should be softening and moistening with water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it evenly, then plaster as we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do so, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if the plaster that we have said for hot abscesses comes to the mother.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding comes from the decorations, it should be washed with restraining water, and other remedies applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with one child, then she consulted another over that one, and rejected the other as dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came to her belly button, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began with great turmoil.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought out the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman remained for a long time like that, and there would occasionally come out a small piece of blood from her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not forgotten this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	on bringing the mother back to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the preservative, by which one preserves the books; and with two turnings at two heads of two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restricted one, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the fist should be one and a half fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and as long as half a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two lines should be two joinings of this same fist, which are firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two joinings are placed in the mouth of the mother to open when one turns the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, should be made of fir of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of forceps.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have two heads with two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the mother opening with all the instrument, then make the woman sit on one bed, her feet stretched out and her legs spread apart,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then place the two joinings together in the mother, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you have done with the forceps evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mother, until the ball does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and their appearances are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then is the work more hasty and higher for men in proportion to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her placenta, and then make her expel it with condiments, and hold your hands to the mouth and navel.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps because of this, well is it.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take a pot, and make a small perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, casaline, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled or put in water on the fire; then place a rope or a perforation of the pot and one end in the mouth of the mortar.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steep until the vapors come down into the mortar; then let it be strained, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second infusion is done quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not well, instruct the patient to soak their left hand in sesame oil or in alder muskroot, and then put it back in its natural state.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and make the second infusion; and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the mortar does not hinder the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but she must be moved slightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; if it comes and dislodges itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the mortar is stopped up, we have said the remedy for straining and for fumigating herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she does not do all that we have said, then beware that you do not fail to extract it.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but what is at the mouth of the mortar, you must tie it to the woman's crutch, then anoint her with four-herb ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	so it will help and restore her, and she will come to be well; but nevertheless, when it has worked its way in, a bad odor comes up from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It is therefore necessary to do suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have tried fumigations with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles seeing a rope, and one puts the fine head into its natural state, and the wide handles above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it steep until it is well used up, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped up by subtle abscess.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary for the patient to pierce that abscess at its head, and not pierce it with sharp steel, and secure the ligature so it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put it on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop up, put a plug of linen or a perforated cord, and let it stay for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said with the linen plug.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come below the foundation are nodulations, and grow larger as they come from beneath the foundation to above it, or in the space between the two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it works and brings forth more moisture, awake white or subtle pus.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulas pass away; and they are known by this that there is either evacuation or purging or blowing when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance it jumps out in a leap.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they arrive just to the jointure of the crutch, and just not of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows that the fistula is passing through the foundation, and not passing.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you should put your two index fingers or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistiness, then you should insert a fine linen tent or one hair of horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your own finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is no evacuation or purging or discharge from the perforation, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is passing just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit, then it brings forth urine, and cannot be cured by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just to the jointure of the crutch, then the tent comes out just above it;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twistiness and the discovery of the pain around it, then it is that it brings forth pus, and does not value medicine or healing by ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these passing fistulas there is no cure other than surgery, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not passing and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have tried.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their crutches, and have their crutches inclined towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a fine needle of iron or linen if there is twistiness, as long as you know where the tent comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your two index fingers.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if it feels then that the tent has pierced; and is discovered where you feel between your finger and the abscess or flesh, then know that it is passing.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	so one cannot heal it without great effort.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid one does there is that one cauterizes the subtle abscess according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and insert it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out at the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred parts are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat it with moist tents in butter, until the burned parts are well, and then treat it with ointment anointing the char and sewing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, there is no other way for it to be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters and does not pierce just to the point that is at the foundation, and there is between your two fingers and the tent a thick covering of char or abscess, and you see the fistula where the covering of flesh ends.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the head of the abscess begins at the start of the fistula, and pushes forward until it reaches the tent, and then does the cauterization afterwards, as long as it comes to the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered and fall; then remove those fragments that seem like a bird's feather, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine straight away.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauterization assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning away of those fragments joined together, and the stopping of blood and drying up of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the wet tents with butter or crushed hazelnuts, until the flesh yields and the charred fragments fall into the bowl.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the swelling sores that grow hard skin, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the foundation and is far removed from the body, then bind your double or foundation and question those things.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you sense the tent and there are two threads or strings or fragments, where it is close to piercing, then there should be no fires but only a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the foundation, or if you can, insert tents and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and the evacuations come unwillingly.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean then when it is cut away from the foundation, by tent or other appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove those fragments that are in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you bind the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation next to the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bind one twisted thread into two, and bind the tent to all the thread in the fistula as far as it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then take out the thread from that perforation, so that you bind your double or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the top of the thread, and bring together the two ends together, and bind one to the other, and let it stay for one day or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it at times, until the fibers cut those fragments that are between them, and they fall.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep down.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make a cut so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spine of the spinous bone which makes the fistula is much gnawed at one end and torn.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side not, for that reason you should not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of ulcers
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Ulcers are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in the end blood flows.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are beyond the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are beyond have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and in the end a little yellow water or a little blood flows, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those that are within the foundation is this: you instruct the patient to stretch himself so as to lie in chambers until the foundation comes forth, and the fibers appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	so hasten, and hold it with pincers or at your fingernail, then cut into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligaments cannot hold due to their moisture, then take them in one cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of cambric.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them to your double, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in place of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until he is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come forth, then enema the patient with an enema biting and sharp to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it may come forth openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients are prepared, and the fibers are loose from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them at your fingernail or with pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he may fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you make the stitching according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and bind it in a needle, and then draw the thread up and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is of the width; and bind the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put a moist cloth on the foundation in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave him until he has fallen asleep, and when they are asleep, then treat them with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the devil or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that the intestines dry up in the intestine, and by natural constraint, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you remove the bark above at the point of a spine or at your fingernail, which does not allow it to moisten.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and then treat it until it is sewn up as necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	If he cannot sweat, then continue the purging more strongly than before, until he is healthy and drained.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure him until he is healed.
dou fremit	from fear
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A mouse is a small, imperfectly formed appearance outside the body, and goes in very deep.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and at times the tumor freezes, and it is felt just like death from fear, and comes throughout the entire body, more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cord from an oar of a goose or a strong vulture's feather, and put that cord on the swelling, until it surrounds the swelling entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around all the cord until you encircle the swelling entirely, and put it in deep, and extract the swelling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, then do this with a cord of iron or lead according to this form, and be subtle beneath and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	not piercing, but rather to hold at two and press; And if you see fit, then cauterize the swelling, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a cyst
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At times one makes a cyst of silver or bronze, or melted lead or mail; and at times one makes these small and great instruments, according to the way they are arranged.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the cyst, small or great, is above broad, or if the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and if there is a swelling or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head be pierced within; and have two holes on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly or the womb be filled with medications from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around by small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and have between each hole one thread of espace, then put in these holes one strong thread of twisted silk in ten or eleven turns around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And be the medication not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cyst with oil or hen's egg yolk or something similar, then put it in gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then press the instruments with both hands together, until it is completely visible, then extract the cyst, and lift the patient's legs up to the appearance.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medication wants to come out, then bind it tight as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night afterwards, it is more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him in a disease of belly swelling, and the medication hastens to come out, then continue it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then be the cauterization as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle cauterization where the skin will be strained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by stoning with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes on the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from stoning with a stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt slightly about abscess hot: if it does so soon heal from the cephalic side even if it comes forth with blood from the wound, and be the healing contrary to the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and instruct the patient to take in wine and large meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to get better, then be reduced in his meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses hot come, a moist cloth in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and it's not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, then put on some unguents, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, of suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is uncovered of bone and putrid, and holds only by a little, then cut it; then treat the wound with medication, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat large meat dishes, such as cooked testicles and wheat, as well as chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or skin rot, and it is not touching the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw away the foul flesh, then treat the wound.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without a cut, and it cannot be stopped by medications, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loosened, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help at all, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which heals again as soon as the air has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and powder it finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and stretch it strongly, until it heals well and joins all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it tightly, and let it remain unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does not do this with cold only, when one has not the incense or the blood of a dragon, but only if the fire has changed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has changed the wound, so too it should be, and one would not put on this powder at all.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive unguents or poultices made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it flows freely.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with other remedies until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you afterwards about breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be sweet, like cold water mixed with rose oil and mixed again in sweet water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other powders of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and tie it with bandages, then heal with remedies until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, then lance or cut them lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and there comes a flow of blood, then open it up, ligate it, and cauterize it as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut or the jugular vein, and the conduit is blocked, by which the flesh goes.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	so sew up the jugular vein on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but restore it to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then stretch it gradually, and let it be for some days, then heal with dry unguents until he is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot get rid of until the wound has healed.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let the flesh be severed and ligated at the exit.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound caused by lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of festering or pus in the wound that makes the patient languish: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then put no powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with the bandage that does not allow the blood to flow deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and returns to the heart, and kills the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put on attractive unguent, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have unguent, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out excess moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if it does not come with spasms, nor evil trembling of the heart or faintness from languishing.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal with tents and other remedies until he is healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and work, then know that there is a fistula; then treat as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, then treat as one should with what is before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone and there are cut pieces, then scrape the wound, and remove the pieces that are loose.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, then let the wound heal, so that it will be bound with ligatures.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines are cut, by which the introduction of them.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse for a small wound than a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one puts the intestines back in more slowly, if one does not put them in little by little.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they enter more slowly.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it is worth more for the medium wound, because one resets the intestine to its place that has other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other stitches proper are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine comes out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and if something is of the putting back, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Soak an esponge or one woollen cloth in cold water only.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you boil in water, wormwood and cypress, and spikenard,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and purge the intestine until the swelling is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine restrains, and is good for only one application to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or ale and have the meadowsweet cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by that it is relieved the entrance to a little something;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is good only once the cutting.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that no one should cut without great necessity, there isn't;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and that is the instrument to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	so cut within the curvature and do not force it, and see how it takes shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	so put it back in its natural place in its proper location,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, for this is a marvel.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	so it is necessary that you make the patient sit on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	so place the head and chest higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	so position it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to follow what I say about great and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Put these things on small wounds that are pleasing to you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and close the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common method of stitching,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound one or two fingers' space, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the sphygmachus,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that side,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and tie the two heads of the sphygmachus together in three places;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain it with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and then close the two heads of the wound properly,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave one or two fingers' space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease to do this until you have need of needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be the needles suitable for small and large things,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles pierce through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore it is necessary that they be suitable;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	for they do not cut and open the wound before the stitching;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not harm the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or cloth strips on the heads of the needles to keep them from moving,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because one or two needles are sufficient.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching method is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you tie the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the sphygmachus together with a needle that has a good strong thread,
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all three times,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then draw out the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews dresses.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitching, as wide as the breadth of a minor finger.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching is suitable for men,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I stitched a wound that a man had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in width.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and thus were the intestines badly exposed for two palms in width,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestine and it had been outside for 24 hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was stitched up just 15 days later, and I healed it, and it became sound.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in one place where we could not find any, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was sound.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and push it from the outside part into the inside part;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the skin straight on straight, then tie the head of the sphygmachus or costive to where you have inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the other side of the inside part straight into the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as tailors do with furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave the sphygmachus once on one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galen says properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is such that some people do, who bring together the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the heads of the sphygmachus to the other head, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle near the head of the mirach, and make it pierce only that place,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two heads of the sphygmachus;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part into the inside part,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	the second joint of the scrotum;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make two punctures one on each side of the outer part up to the inner part in the two other joints of the scrotum that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the more usual and common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galens says this saying, and some bear witness to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leathers;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is inside the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	it is the stitching more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the air has changed it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top a powder of burned charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the air has changed it, then apply some ointment that is present until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut off the thread, and sew up the scrotum and the testicles;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, then apply some old cotton,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicine for many simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will cause community of the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is fitting to anoint with light oil of temperate heat, or with rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the armpits and under the shoulders;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and many times this happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	then cleanse him with black wine tea, and likewise if the burning comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the plantness of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to that of hares.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become green or black, then it is fitting that you bind the place that is black, so that blood does not flow forth,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then tie off what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two joints hanging down from the part below the wound up to the outside to facilitate extraction when the intestines fall, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	one can restore it in some men,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became covered and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and belching;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it close, I doubted that the patient had harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experienced people say that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take fresh threads from great testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thread has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that she strangles her mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then tie the knot, and it stays so that he cannot untie it,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This method remains in the intestine, and comes to no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching with threads is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the larger intestine, then there is no remedy nor health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes a boil, is universally called "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and likewise when it breaks and heals.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And fistula is according to the greenish nodulation of hard and white abscesses, or one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it breaks open like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it bursts forth suddenly, and other times slowly.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times a lot;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no scar,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is not other than by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	to wit, by the smallness of the blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or if there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the wound is corrupted, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because of the property in the region, digestion is slow and health is delayed, and it flows naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And it is necessary that I let you know the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or the spleen, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it is to that part which belongs to the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if any fistula does not come just to the point that I have said, and you have faith in the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it clearly, take a piece of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, then cut it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a subtle piece of lead
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for lead bends to fit around the curvity.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tenths,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	then cleanse it through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows quickly from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then cut the bleeding as you are able, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and it is covered in depth.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places I told you, then cut according to what I told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and extract the decayed flesh and corrupt char that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well founded from a right place, then it is necessary that you cut in depth as far as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then put moistened tents of medicinal aloe, and bind them just to the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine consumes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put ointments of sweet salve on clean flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with sweet salve until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed, then do as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet at the end:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	so uncover and cut until you reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot go further;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	so there is no other remedy than to wait for nature's aid.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if it is a small corrupt bone, and you can draw it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	then extract it with an instrument suitable for this.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, then remove them all, not leaving even one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	then cut and separate the moist flesh and bone, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put the wound into a poultice of sweet powder.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh is purged around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have removed more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a great bone, such as one of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone.
puis restoure la plaie;	and then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the corrupted bone and it comes just to the mold of the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is necessary to scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is closed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the materials came to the leg and it was inflamed with a big abscess, and there was no other cause by which to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the surgeons, through their foolishness, worked so much that the abscess opened.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and it was corroding a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and there came many openings that all poured forth foulness and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many surgeons put treatments around for two years, and there was no relief in the art of healing,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medications by which he was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what flowed forth from the openings with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I placed a tent in one of those openings, and then searched all the openings.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one opened into another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut in one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and it was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I cleaned away what appeared from the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for the one I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then recommenced, and uncovered the bone just as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the corruption continued in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and I made an effort to close the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not pull so hard as to pull off about a palm's width from the bone, and then tear it all apart.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored him with medications; and he was healed and bound up quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it did not seem necessary to start the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For often the blood evacuation was painful, but he was healed entirely.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and instead of the bone, a hard callus grew, and he was in good condition with no harm or hindrance from anything at all, neither when lying down nor when getting up.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take a ligature and strain it to the top of the exposed bone.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct someone to pull it up high;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another ligature made of thicker linen than the first one, and tie it above the callus that is over the bone.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the top, so that you draw the corrupt flesh down below.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the callus above the place where you want to set it, so that the setting does not harm the callus.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a hot iron or a wooden splint below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to set it as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and then set it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover all the callus; then put a hot iron below,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then set the part from one end of the corruption to the other, and be sure to make the setting a good distance from the length of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint and set the bone where it contains on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other option than to cut it out;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the fingernail of the hand or in the toenail, then that is a very strong thing.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nonetheless it is necessary for you to ask about this corruption how it appears;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and settings for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare the instrument for each kind of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so prepare the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder can become dislocated due to a cause within, or due to a cause outside.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have used medicine to treat that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not help.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	so cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes from.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil of a greater deficiency in the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the sign is that the member becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards it appears as if the blackness had spread from one member to another.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold of everything in the body; and you hasten to cover it.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if this is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and viper and similar creatures.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corruption is at the head of the joint, then cut it off, and do not give it any space to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches as far as the hand, then cut it off at the wrist, so that the corruption does not reach up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it reaches the arm, then cut it off at the shoulder; and if it passes beyond that, it's death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no remedy other than the quantity of his virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so it goes when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cut it off after the second joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, then cut off at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of cutting or setting the member is that you tie it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch one minister down with one ligature, and another minister up with the other ligature.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you uncover the flesh that is between the two ligatures to a spatula-width wide, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cut or set it, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the setting does not touch the healthy bone.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and another injury and abscess ensues in the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding occurs during surgery, then cauterize the area quickly.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medication until it is complete.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man on his sickbed:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness that seemed like burning fire.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it consumed the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after that, the corruption came back to his finger of the hand, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put on him things that would rebound after the purification of the body, but the corruption could not cease.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wished that I cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of making the material rebound.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the man's vitality was weak; and he became despondent altogether, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and instructs him to cover his hand, and becomes well.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no other story except that which is made on the other side, if one needs it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess sometimes comes to a swollen joint, and stays so long that it causes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then bursts and breaks open, and the pus jumps out, and the joint remains empty, just like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as subtle as one-eighth of delicate cloths,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not reach all the way to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such diseases are called "stains",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is like this: you cut the skin all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like delicate cloths;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not hurt because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with fat, then treat it with a poultice thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look and see if the breasts are large, and the abscess that is in them has a foul odor,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then treat it with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take equal parts of asafoetida, oil, and white lead, and put them in one vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take what you need from this, and mix it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and use the poultice to compress the breast, and stop the abscess;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine there for two hours, then strain it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breast is healed and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes mix with ash water,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it flow, and use it as a poultice, until you know that the breast is well healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure this, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the ash water,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then mix it with water and honey, or add a little white lead to it;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or use it as a poultice with honey and wine mixed together, so that the honey has the property of healing and cleansing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the flesh fresh;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well healed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	then use a poultice of what causes flesh to grow in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take diaphanous powder, and mix it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or use it as a poultice of some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned or to treat with ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the abscess on the breast is small, and the poultice of the clister cannot enter it,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	then enlarge it slightly with a bit of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Basilikon ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it just so that one little part or the poultice can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the abscess that discharges pus is above, then cut it open or lower it to where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the pus is in depth, one should not allow flesh to remain;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cut open the breast below as you see;
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then prepare it in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest part where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the pus is deep, one should not allow flesh to remain;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cut open the breast below as you see;
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then prepare it in such a way that the pus flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the pus;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and place it on one layer of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cut at the stronger part of the abscess in the breast a little larger than the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then put soft ointment on one more layer according to the size of the abscess;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the abscess of the breast to ease the pus, and do not remove the great linen cloth except after a few days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is on the abscess of the breast, often removes to remove the pus,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what flows from the pus, whether it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or indigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been thus extended and you see the nature that bursts forth on the abscess of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	then know that the breast is healed, and approaches health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then remove it in the morning or the third day, and when you remove the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast discharges undigested pus after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons come forth after a long time, do not despair of health;
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for health is approaching. For there are some people whose flesh takes time to heal in their wounds, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested pus bursts forth from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breast takes time to heal and becomes inflamed, then add dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	like diaphanous ointment, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diaphanous ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when diaphanous ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and powder on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply one piece of cloth, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatic substance for a long time,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like wheat of violets and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simple or composite remedies: crush them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that corruption has penetrated deep into the bone, or made a impression on the bones, or caused stiffness in the limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the tongue
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Furuncle is an abscess that arises under the finger of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or of the foot, or happens by chance in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a great abscess comes forth,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and flow so much that they reach the root of the tongue, and sometimes even all the way to it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes corrosion right up to the bone, so that there is a foul pain, and the joint of the toe is wide, and the color is fluxed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	then it is necessary that you cut away all the excess flesh remaining from the tongue,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the tongue is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the tongue then putsrefies the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then it is necessary that you put a cloth under the tongue which pricks the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and tie it up above, and cut away that subtle and delicate flesh.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with oils until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut away the bone, and treat further, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the toe corrupting, then cut it away in one piece as is said before;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed and swollen, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut away the tongue of the palate with a crosswise cut above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and take care that the cut does not come right down to the flesh underneath the tongue, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The fingers which are born on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is a bone or a joint.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or in some of the toes of the feet.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that are born in any toe of the foot do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that are born at the joint of the foot, by chance, do move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the fleshiness of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at the root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold off from cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or has a bony toe, it is necessary that you cut away the flesh all around to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this case, then treat until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come together in the toes come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cut away the swelling, and then repair the toe according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two cloths or moistened napkins soaked in rose oil, so that they do not swell.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the swelling is settled, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a swelling comes on any of his toes with the palm, then cut away that swelling in the same way as before.
Des vils	Of warts
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Warts are great, swollen, and full of melancholy excessences that come on many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they come more often on the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer to him at times an evacuation of bile, and then heal with the help of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut them away, and treat with black blood afterwards;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you lift up the vein, and treat it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is according to this manner: first rise the leg of hot water very strongly, so that the thick blood becomes subtle.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut the vein in one piece, or in two, or in three, with a wide incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command that he eat food in order to evacuate black bile.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin again the evacuation and healing when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The shaving of him is according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put him in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you don't have a bath, then heat him up over the fire, and then cut away the vein in the long part of the leg at the top of the kneecap, or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then soak the skin in vinegar, and scrape away the vein from each part, until it is apparent when you touch it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one can see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then tie the thread underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then pour it onto the scale lightly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then cut into another place on top of three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then lift it onto the scale, just as you did, and pour it onto another scale, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut another size, or as many as you need, then lift it, and cut to the bone of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull and lift just to the second size; then draw it from size to size, until it is all bare, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull and lift it, then tie an awl to each strong doubled thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and pull and lift it, and tie underneath one thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it doesn't cut, for if it cuts, one cannot pull or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have pulled it all out, then place wet wool on the wound's bed in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and turned together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then you must divide it twistedly, but do not cut it; and pull it out just as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it only cuts the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is situated in legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs nor trees, and in land where there is not a drop of moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance it is found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to the purulence that comes from underneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as if it came from within the body as a serpent and moves, situated between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes with a very great inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the opening is made, then you must envelop around a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two inches, and bind it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it comes to the end, wrap it around the cloth, and bind it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut off a part and wrap the remaining piece, and do not cut off its root until it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, and bring abscess and purulence or inflammation at that place, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which reason it is necessary to treat it little by little until the end, and not leave anything remaining in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this vein is treated when it is five palms long or ten,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one man came to me, from whom it issued ten palms long, and when you cut it, he put a thread or a peg in, and pierced it right down to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and let the material inside be emptied, and bring medicine to the place to prevent purulence for some time, then care for it just as you would for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein is treated with many remedies, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out much through openings, and from which springs forth remedies; then care for it just as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often occurs in oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down through the entire body,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and one can feel it very well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes and bursts forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by purulence of some humors, such as those that come from worms, serpents, and lumbrii or ascarids in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts of its evil nature, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eyes.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance, it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot avoid but when it moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong tight ligature.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut on top and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye at the forehead, then tie a bandage tightly underneath it, then cut on top and pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient with a purging medicine for the body's foul humors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of foods that cause purulence.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and about an hour later, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	quicker than anything else, like bright silver as it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then about an hour later it coursed throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was twisting around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease move like that before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had wanted many to move well from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry skin and her veins were uncovered,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and therefore appears that constrained breathlessness;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason to those who are healthy, and who have moist skins and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	so bind above and below hastily, and then cut on top until the constrained breathlessness comes forth.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cautery the place; and if you do not see it to your satisfaction,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	then use a remedy against the breathlessness, such as stinking pills and serpents' pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	(None)
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small, and barbed, and glued;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those that pierce in any member do so in two ways: either the principal member is barbed,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it pierces then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the brain sign when the arrow pierces and breaks through the bone, and jumps over the sac that is above the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	which is when there is dimness and dullness and bewilderment and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps from the moist white wound like pustules, and also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and do not extract the arrow.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the spleen when it is pierced is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the spleen becomes as if boils, and in dark black blood, and comes with cold sweat and fainting;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know with no doubt that death is certain.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that pierces the womb is when without foam it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he sighs high and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the covering of the breast, then it is below the small ribs; and it yields a great deal of pain and great anguish and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the belly, and in jumping it does not pass through the large intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and loins of the back, and the ribs, and hips, and legs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because I experienced it thus, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man that an arrow fell onto the palm of his hand at the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and extracted it from the other side below the ear fat, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I treated one man who had an arrow in the fatty tissue of his eyelid, just below the eyebrow:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was lodged and I could only reach as far as the tip towards the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, all light iron without ears; the patient was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I treated an arrow that pierced a Christian from the throat to the ear:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I extracted the barbs and made it subtler until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I treated an arrow in one man who had it lodged in his belly, and thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after 30 days, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and drew it out, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw one man who had an arrow pierce his back, and the wound was closed above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw one other man who had an arrow pierce his face, and the wound was closed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others were similar.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And I treated an arrow in one of the prince's king who had it lodged near the nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly declining to the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called for the treatment after it had been lodged for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought it with all a subtle tent, and did not feel it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a pricking and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the skin a plaster of attractive and digestive nature, because the skin does not inflate;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the skin of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	so that he felt the arrow one day inside his belly; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a medicine of corrosive nature for many days, until it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck to the skin;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and the edges of the wound healed well in three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I opened up the wound so much that I inserted forceps, and pulled it from one side and the other, but could not get it out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not stop subtlety and ingenuity with instruments, until I took it one day with well-made forceps,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so I did and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot learn everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters can take note of very little, and of that which is present and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	and true experience of nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of members where they are stuck except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the skin where they enter or from the other side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out on the other side where it enters is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes now jumps out.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, then leave it until the flesh is ripe around, and the issue is freed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it so for some days, and move each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps out, and if it does not, then pierce all around with one very fine force, until the skin around is stretched, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: so do not pull it out, but leave it until it is equal after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrow comes just to the pit of the brain, that's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come up to the pit of the brain,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains some days without bad accident, then I guide him as to how to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck and cannot come out further, then I administer tarers around, as I have said to you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is stuck in the flesh of the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it in every tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you find it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot because of the constriction of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut through as much as the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it is stuck.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	so cut off the flesh that is stuck from both sides to the point where you can;
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtlety well that you do not break the arrow, lest you should pull it out more grievously.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the skin around is ripe, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be freed.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your wit to work on how you can pull out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient in the form that he was when the arrow struck him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot do so, then put him as shown by the sign which shows to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from the other side, or it appears to be connected to something of it, or the skin is inflamed in the area where one can see or feel it apparently;
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand around gently, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the head of the arrow is stuck in there, then push it all the way to the end.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the head breaks off and you must administer binding, then use one instrument that is beveled;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the bevel of the instrument; and then push forward.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is beveled, then use one instrument with an entering point to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is surrounded by flesh, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as is proper.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow strikes at the hip or at the stomach or at the bladder or at the ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can cut above it, then cut;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The forms of tweezers used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many forms: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the comb-like hairpiece is also like a bird's feather,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push against the tip of the arrow, as follows is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of tweezers to push and to grasp if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of veins that one cleans oneself, there are .xxxi., of which it has sixteen in the head.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to say: two temples which are after the ears, which are called "herbech";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins one cleans oneself commonly are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the scrotum,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that one that one cleans oneself, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saphena is the vein which is between the auricular and annular, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is under the curve of the pocket on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphena which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The cleansing of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the cleanser, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two small pouches depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	which then goes to your shoulder, and where you feel the pulse under your shoulder, it begins to rise;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance, and plunge it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two fingers' breadth across, and make it bleed until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then bind and tie it, so that it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The cleansing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and for sore eyes, and habitual blindness, and for tears that flow to the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the cleanser are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient tightens their neck so that the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse under your shoulder, and then begins to rise;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the key above the vein at the height of your thumb's first joint, and plunge the lance below.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein high, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and make the wound bleed according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The cleansing of the forehead vein is just as good for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for ruddiness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the qualities are that the patient tightens their neck while twisting, so that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fossor", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and no longer has a broad inflammation.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the inflammation be too great; and the wound will cross over, for the bone is close, and by chance break through when it is subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The cleansing of the two veins that are in the two eyes helps with eye problems, and with itch, and with ruddiness, and with yellowing in the eye, and with facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the qualities of their cleansing are that the patient tightens their neck while twisting with some kind of ligature, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then let it bleed, and be the cleansing of the transverse vein, about a finger's breadth long and about as wide, for there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break through; then make the wound bleed, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The cleansing of the nasal vein is good for ague, and for sudden sneezing, and for facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as migraines and ruddiness that come to the face, and especially when they are ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the qualities of the cleansing are that the patient tightens their neck, then presses their nose with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a thin, long inflammation, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils, in the lip-like fold that is between them.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	The vein does not open well here, and blood will start flowing now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too far in depth, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it at night, for it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The juice of two ginsengs helps in the constriction of the gout, and at the beginning of menstruation, and in many diseases, and in impotence, and in corruption, and in herpes, and itching.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the juice is that the patient stretches his neck above one and then the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then open the vein of the long one somewhat widely, then let the blood flow temperately, or as much as is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do the same on the other vein, then release the ligature, and steady the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not choke; and let him sleep until morning, when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the juice of leaves
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The juice of the veins from the leaves above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corrupt gums, and splits in lips, and around the nose.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	and the quality of the juice is that it makes the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and you can recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the juice under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The juice of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the cephalic juice, and it is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the juice is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks under each side one black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then cut one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the back which are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either in piercing with a wide flannel or an olive-like subtle one as the back trenches, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flannel is very well known, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins which are smooth and full of thick blood that appears, and contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the olive-like flannel:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for bleeding thin veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and around the neck, and around the belly, and in the chest;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the doctor to bleed carefully, and to beware of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes forth in abundance, then it behooves him to stanch it, as I said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be pierced with the flannel, but cut as anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, then it behooves you to compress it, and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or else you want some part of it, or you bleed instead in the arm between the veins: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut with the flannel as anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the bleeding, it behooves you then to compress the arm, that you touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with a pin, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with flannel anesil;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swelled, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it flow upwards just like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and put your hand on high for a long time, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, as often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	tie up the arm and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on watch, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it flows forth, and medical supplies are not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of linen from the fistula, and cut it, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of bleeding is not grievous in many dispositions for the small wound of the plaque, and the power of the ligature of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood that flows from the head above, and from the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it behooves the doctor to beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he pierces too far in depth, and finds the nerve;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and swells up and the bleeding is grievous, and by chance cannot be stopped.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then it behooves you to bleed it with the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it longwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The brain fluid of the cephalic region helps, which attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed with a vein of the olive or myrtle flame, because this is the most saving of all veins, since there are no nerves nor arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek out the most level position, and do not disturb anything if it works the first time, and one recommences;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance some people's veins become swollen, so that one must do it once, but it does not cause anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not done except to preserve health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent diseases from coming;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are cut: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of privations to excess, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed either the first day or the third day, after two hours or three of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding done for diseases has no fixed time, but when there is need, whether by day or by night, in all hours and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is more than four months pregnant up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one bleed those who are very old and have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to bleed, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he first clears the intestines with a light purgation.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if they have many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluities from the intestines which are harmful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one bleed those who are too full of meats, nor those who are drunk, until they recover from it, nor those who are dropsical;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one should not bleed after a colicky passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and multiple times going to bed with a woman, and travail, watching, and fasting, and all such things that make whole virtue, or by something of the arm or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly mix the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter or take a bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and bleed from the vein of the liver around the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep away from that day all labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be quiet and joyful, and let the bleeders be above him whom one bleeds, and press his arm two or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then loosen the ligature gradually, for if it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow properly;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then press the bandage with one's hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the bleeders with the flame of a little old oil, then place his left hand on top of that vein below the bandage a little bit where he wants to bleed;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not collapse and fail when it is pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow as smoothly as strings at the time of bleeding, and others that are full of windy emptiness;
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts the flame on it, it recoils from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, it is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the bleeders be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at the first attempt, that is good; if not, then one recommences a little below or above that place in haste, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the patient is frightened, one should leave it a day or two, and not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter the bath, then recommence the bleeding if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the incision is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that very incision itself for all the flame straightway;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little hastily, but so that the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swollen, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little of linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good in this limb where the oil lies.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the linseed oil to each bleeding that you bleed the veins, in order to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing causes trickling and bleeding from the eyes, when one puts it on the limb; so subtly does it flow and separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess which often happens, especially when it is not bled too much except at that time or the opening of the vein is small;
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	so hasten, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and wine, warm a little, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if there remains on the limb after some days any blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on something with aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of camphor, mastice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there appears an abscess and swelling at the basilic vein: then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad swelling.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put anything of what we have said on it, for by chance there may be a lack of blood from the artery; but make one application of dry poultice to harden the limb, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it is thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is weak and feeble, and has need of bloodletting, that one make a larger wound, and the flaps be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And to one who is feeble, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them little by little, and one should heal them by cutting across, not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of healing is saved from the corruption of blood and the severing of nerve, and is worth more than long or wide healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread soaked in grape juice; if he is fevered, then apply blood-letting three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, then moisten his bread with a sweet syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he vomits after bloodletting, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef and a subtle, well-scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of swooning, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to vent his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to vent his arm after the first bloodletting, and he has strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood inside the body which is already fevered, and brings on fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening as far as it can be done.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and then you will bring together all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse while he is healing, so that death may not come in place of convalescence.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the healer is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not happen when you see the arm loosened, and blood coming out the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	unless he is curved, then let him straighten his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him stay until he heals the second time; or you come to the tip of the flap, as long as the blood that has congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on one pouce of silk dipped in water, and press upon it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let it be done in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is healed in place of the jugular vein because it is compounded.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the fleshy part is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind him moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal him now by cutting across, not by piercing long or wide.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and let him heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put his hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is summer, then do not put his hand in hot water again, for one puts him more at risk of harm in summer than in winter.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the salvetele of the right hand is worth more than all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is inflamed, so that one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it heals across, and if you cut through all of it in all, then nothing will hurt.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too far inward, for the nerves are underneath all those strips of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to close it quickly, and thus do for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healing of the vein on the left hand is worth more for the illness of the mouse, and do all the same as I have told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The healing of the sophene is worth more than all diseases that are under the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and old women's hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its healing is that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and lie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many rain-like substances go up above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	heal it then either by opening a larger vein or at the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and let the healing be across as in cutting; and let the flaps be evenly stitched.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healer fails the first time, then he should start again the second time a little above, for the flesh is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	nor fear nerves, as we have said, and thus do with the sophene of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its healing is worth for the pain in the back, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters or takes a bath, and stretches above the ankle four times by twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in all ways you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very quickly healed by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not believe it, then look at any scar of his that appears on the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of nails;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and do so much to stop the bleeding as you see fit, and then loosen the bandage, and put a cloth on it and tighten it; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Of wounds from cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping-glasses are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this cupping that is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is all fire, or not on fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and cupping that is done by piercing and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	whereof one is entirely on the head; and the others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the cupping-glass below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping-glasses on both shoulders; and the cupping-glasses above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the cupping-glasses in both arms; and the cupping-glasses in both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cupping-glasses on both ankles; and the cupping does not treat blood, unless for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore one should not faint from it, as one would from bleeding;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, due to necessity of diseases, it is necessary to cup, or for habits, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between, and throughout each period;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who become repleted and flushed in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darken around the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who develop a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and bleed;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who see visions, and behold by night, and are hurt and wounded and die and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even more so when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to cup after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding from the nose helps with the swelling of the head... that comes to them, and it is not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this cupping is in place of the bleeding from the head.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not fitting for someone who has a cold complexion to use this, or who has catarrh, for this does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it is not fitting for the elderly to use this, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who cure themselves often, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping-glass a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the chest.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for rupture of the channel of the womb, and for all sorts of swelling, and for repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to use a little force, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The cuppings on the two sides of the neck are worth for pains in the head, and obtalmia, and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in place of the bleeding from the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the servant to stretch out his hand when applying it, so that he does not compress the artery, and no blood comes forth.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The cuppings below the chin are worth for mouth diseases, and for corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bleedings from both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The cuppings on the shoulders are worth for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The cuppings on the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the places are bare of flesh, and know that they are beneath the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping-glass that is on the hip is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping-glass be large, and made of iron, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if they were small, they would break; and this makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings on the legs are said to heal obviously, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and restore the flowers; and they take the place of the two Sophene bones and the two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring on fainting in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping-glass is that you first empty it, and then apply it with a gentle touch, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen area, and observe the flow of blood; then pierce, and remove the cupping-glasses, and take heed of the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick skin, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and slightly deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we should do it often; and if the blood is thick, we should pierce deep and stop when the hearts are pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for someone who has thick skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you grease the places of the cupping-glasses with oil that is appetizing and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the east, with oil of violets, or with oil of sweet almonds, or with oil of cucumber seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is with vinegar, oil of tansy, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	and if the excesses are big and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamite oil, or wormseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	and if the person being cured has tender skin and wide pores, it is not necessary to put oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or another similar one.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And the one who has too much moisture, should rise up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have big excesses rise up with old wine, or water of sycamore, or a decoction of wormseed or chamomile, or other similar ones.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to take medicine with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after the purgation.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he warms himself when he must be purged and when he is purged.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And take care of the one who is being cured is choleric, and his sweat is too abundant and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce in the morning, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink a little, and broth of chicken, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And the one who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderately scented wine that is between old and new, and drink little, and drink frequently, and small birds and young pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day he will be purged, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some people sometimes triacle or muscatel before purgation, or after, to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the sweat be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The poultices that are put to not cause harm are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and on gout, and on the stomach and belly and bowels and behind, for these members do not tolerate being struck or hit.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is only done to draw blood from member to member.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	such as we put on the breasts when a child is sick; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the stomach and belly to reduce the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it takes away the pain when there is inflammation or stone, and by its attractive virtue, by chance, it draws out the inflammation, or removes the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and spleen when there is retained purging.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these poultices are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times with lukewarm water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	such as in diseases of the eyes, and in this manner one fills the poultice with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered to fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be a half-dozen fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have a small hole around the middle one as if to accommodate an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be made of linen, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and it should have in the middle a cross-shaped bar of iron or steel to place a candle upon.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the poultices of children are different from those of old people, and of thin ones from those of fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this poultice on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or a linen wick, and place it in the poultice across the bar that is in the poultice,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and the edges should be on the hole that we have said, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the poultice.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take up the wick just as before, and keep it going often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the poultice therefore which is administered in eye disease, it has no bar or hole, and is only used when it is full of water, and is placed on the member alone.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Poultices are only used when there are no other options for members that cannot be treated with poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare bones, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in sweet and pure water without any disturbance, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a nut of sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and dry, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put one there, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb gently and then with water, very well, and then press it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb heals too much after the poultices, moisten one piece of linen in cold water and put it on, until the sweat is stopped.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the sweat is multiplied, put on vitriol that has been pounded, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the limb and leave them until they dry out on the limb, it will now stop sweating.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the poultices will not adhere, rub the limb with fresh blood, or fix a needle in it until the sweat comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are bleeding, powder on a little bit of alum and silk thread, or ash, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here is the translation:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for breaking and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Listen, dear son, that the foolish doctor will fall from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason is estranged the science in our land, for I never found any good;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of instruments that are prepared, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who have been experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely takes over, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is not very cold or too warm; and mixed chills, that is to say cold fits, and flesh of hare and of goat, and does not drink wine, nor mix any fat meats, and does not overfill with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about hot abscess or spreading of matter in the member; then revives the patient to his previous good governance which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and pork belly, and oysters, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For good nourishment makes the patient recover more quickly and sooner fixes the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of old men and decrepit people cannot be well recovered or united according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but don't care, reset on the broken bone one thick tendon that sets and joins the member together, so long as it strengthens like it was before; and don't let it stop doing its work, and because of this it is necessary to nourish with thick meats, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breakages are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breakage of the head is one thing and the breakage of the back or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breakages.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur with movement, and others while adjusting, such as the snapping of a feather to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it has a break with a wound, and a break all along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each kind has its own remedy, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the break of the bone is known by what the joint twists, and appears well by its defect, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So it is not necessary that you move the limb with your hand, but put on medicines that come next, and then restrain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage that occurs with movement, and are the two parts disconnected, it is necessary now to set them in equal alignment, so that hot abscesses may come forth;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come forth, let it be left alone for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it in equal alignment with the joint that you can do lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain it, as is necessary next.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has broken pieces, and they are spread apart by two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or as far as your hand can reach if it is small members, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member in its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset by all means the additions to their places with the movement that you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and join well the two bones of the joint according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so dress it beautifully, and don't restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring about hot abscesses and contraction in the member do, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in place, so chastise the patient well that they do not move it, nor while awake or asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it needs to be put in such a condition that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set right, so that twisting does not come about when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle linen drapes.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are great, such as thighs and leg: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and strong linen bandage, for the wide bandages encompass all the large member and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no flaw.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie around the stumps light bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and restrain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go up above the break and restrain it less, so that the break may withdraw a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften it little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy place, then take another ligament and turn around again on the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligaments pieces of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything together with one bandage, and then put well-made stays on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, then put something calming on top that absorbs the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then strain on your stays, and be of the thickness of a well-worn cane or of boxwood which makes hawthorns, or of palm tree saplings, and be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stay you put on the break is a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as long as is needed for the member of smallness or largeness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then strain on the stays just as you did in the first lesson, then bind above with a thread in harmony, just as in the first lesson on the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the tighter it is above, the looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bonds with twisted linen cords, and it's a great error, because the bond cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each stay less than two fingers' breadth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the stays after the straining in their natural state, then put under them pieces of linen or fleecy wool, so that he does not get wounded.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will speak of its cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to bind with stays all the members that are broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are great, it is not necessary to put stays there other than after five or seven days, or more according to your security and certainty of a hot abscess happening.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and see here the manner of ancient poultices to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring breakage to several dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of poultice restoring breakage and dislocation and twisting: take 20 abareis and ladani and enule and asefetide and gum arabic and mugat; myrrh and aloe, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of poultice that is worth for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 8; acaice 6; Armenian bolic 10, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another manner of poultice for joints and bones that are dislocated from their place, and calms the pain occurring, and the usage of bone and breakage: take new wool, and soak it in water and oil, and put it on the area. These poultices do not restore, but they are good for calming hot abscesses, and properly removes the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of poultice that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of terrestrial mulberry, and grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another manner of poultice for the restoration of broken bone and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another manner of poultice even stronger than the first one, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of vismalve, and flax seeds, balaust, mellilote, and sansuce, and violet and chamomile flowers, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member to restore it except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member things that are slightly hot and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of poultice that is worth for wound and pain: take mugath and shorn men's hair, or bird's feathers, and vismalve, and mix it equally, and grind it, and make a poultice and the binding.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not loosen it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the place, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is calmed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a knot, until you are sure of hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest the inflammation of the member, and let the pain be removed, then continue the subtle binding, and a little poultice, and do not strain it too hard as before; and subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has become calm and red and painless and swollen, and you have need of plastering and binding, then reapply it as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not release it except after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is set, and approaches the adjustment to the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then the constraint is more than initially, and the swelling increases its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then bind with warm water again, every time you loosen it, and so do this each third day, and adjust the bandage slightly.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work then the swelling is cut off from the member, and promptly make amends to what foolish surgeons do, who leave the member twisted: it's bad, and if it's a troublesome work, I see nothing else but idleness and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	No translation provided as this is not a sentence to be translated, but rather the title of the section or chapter in the medieval medical treatise.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are intended;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone up to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hack or a wedge; and for this reason it is called this kind of break "hack".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone above its piercing point, and it is called this kind of break "absolute"; and the wound from these two breaks is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a splitting or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that persists, which approaches just to the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is reunited in the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small splitting, and for this reason it is called this break "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by piercing stone, or falling, or similar thing, and makes a part of the bone go down, and it looks like hot coals when they are heated above the cauldrons; then the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have or had moist bones, as a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and this happens with all these kinds of breaks where small pieces are dislodged like that, and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of breaks by the pulling on them, and the questioning by probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary resemblance is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it above, then the break shows itself black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take heed to the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, numbness, swelling, fever, and the eyes bursting forth and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the hurt comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have said come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and this is that you take hold of the patient's head wounded, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as softly as you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if bleeding comes to uncover the bone, or abscess becomes calm, then apply the aid that is needed, and this is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the abscess becomes calm and you are sure of bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you strike with a small incision in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another incision slightly larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, all pointed and made of iron, and work gently, so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and rough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you make incisions with a rasp, not too deep lest they penetrate outside the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or one circle, so as not to let the point pass outside the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have rasps for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of rasping:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one rasp on the bone and turn to your right side until you know the bone is pierced; then place the rasp in another part a little later, and do this all around, then strike at the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perturbations, and make it as fine as you can, and gently, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as pincers, forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and shaped the bone, then it is necessary that you remove the apiculate point which remains of the bone to all another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more tapered and more subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of work is that which Galen says, which is more sound; and he says it with great force, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place below the head of this lancet-shaped incision, from which it takes its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut at one spot, and the part is thin in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is applied to the bone, then gently remove it, for one does not hurt the bone at all, nor with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach to the cloth, and the bone is chopped only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to cover over that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	So scrape in front with great scrapers, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine and subtle cuttings and breaks, it is necessary that you make a cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily answered by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the abscess is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take one more cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to harm the abscess, then administer above another linen, and do not strain it too hard except until it covers only the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it thus for one day or two, until the abscess is pacified, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer again medicines without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and watch that the wound is soon clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, nor let anything assemble above, for when bowels assemble on the cloth of the brain, they will run and burst, and great misfortune will befall the patient; for when something biting is placed on the abscess, it will necrotize above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing worse comes but because of the medicine one has put on, and such virtue is present, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in equal measure one cloth, and place it on the abscess;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then proceed with the treatment by means of treatments as is necessary, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one on its own, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it swells or twists, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little drill or perforation to the neck, and place this break within your index finger and at the back, until the neck returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and the drill cannot come to the place, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a rod about a small thickness.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and hasten to restore the first part as soon as you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is pacified, then drill at the top of the neck with pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you drill another from the other side, if the break is there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the perforations of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they are moistened in a mixture of hen's egg and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one drills into the neck or pennes of goose in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, it holds the break, and blows on the patient between; then do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a poultice or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquaion.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come, then place an emplaster on the back, made from sarsaparilla flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg, then apply it to the neck in a light poultice, and do not bind the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then close the gash, and cure things by soldering, as with plasters and unguents suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the neck, then cure with tents, and place pawns of lead, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	The text has ended. The last phrase "de la routure de la mandibule" likely refers to a section or chapter on the treatment of jawbone fractures (routure = fracture, mandibule = jawbone).
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below, and there is no wound behind, and the break is only slightly above, and is not split in two, except for small cracks inside, then one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right side of the jawbone, that you apply your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jawbone, then apply your index finger from the right hand, and drill the break lightly, and close it with the other hand by the back, and place it evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer an extension of three parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	Et if the movement of teeth has occurred, or a routure, so strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on one double drapel; and put on the drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as tightly as you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply ointment on top, with a mixture of flour and egg or farina of wheat, after you have removed the cerote; and apply a light woolen ointment, and if the ointments harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it alone until they are healed; many times one is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses form, so treat according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, repair no part of the bone that has been taken out; but do subtlety with instruments suitable to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remains, then close the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the ointments suitable for this, to bring forth flesh, until they are healed.
de la forcele	of force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forcele breaks in many places before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and this is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the aid box which feels the forcele broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break in place between your knees, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor jutting.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper place.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele out forward, because it comes too far in, then it is necessary that the patient lies somewhat on his hatereil, and puts a pillow under his shoulder, and the assistants push the shoulder down, so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the break to your knees, and if you find it debrisied, then it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but make sure to put this instrument under the forcele to ward off the syphac.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should resemble a spoon, and not be sharp, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, such as you see, and one large and one narrow, like the routure of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the routure is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, then soak one cloth in rose oil and egg white and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dressing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you apply to the bone a poultice made of flour and egg or farina of wheat, and put on light bandages, and place a sphere under the armpit, if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very thick bandage of one palm in width, then put on a double cloth, and the ointment; then take a fine bandage of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the end of the bandage is hanging down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the bandage on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the armpit of the healthy one, and under the armpit of the sick one; and wrap each part separately, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you clearly see that the bandage is not moving over the broken bone, then bind it every day, and when the ligatures loosen, then restrain them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit on his backside, and place a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the aid box up high; so that the break of the forcele will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come, until .xx. days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the ointment, if you see that it is needed, and strain and leave it so, until they are restored; and it is restored in the best case in 28 days, and in less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Not long after the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and it does not stay in its place unless touched; so prepare it according to the figure of the break, and bind it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can; then put on the skin powder made with flour and egg, and light bandages, and a double cloth; then put on a wide and fine bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are any rough patches under the bandage anywhere on the shoulder, then pack those rough patches with linen bandages, so that the bandage stays in place evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again, and put the same bandage on if it has moved out of place, and make the patient sit up straight; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are fulfilled, then release it, and be sure, for this is not a bone that can get loose lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward and points under the skin, then make it prominent, and let it be, and do what we have said about calming hot abscesses in the break of the forcele.
de la brisure dou pis	of the rupture of the breastbone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The breastbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the back. And when it is broken in the middle, so it slopes down below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all around, and by chance vomits blood, and shows the ribs in the broken bone, and one feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one places a small cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly puts equal to all the ways you can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts salves and poultices above the subtle salt, or other lightweight wax, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the strap around again to the back, and holds it gently, and rewards each hour with a little bit, and if it relapses, then holds it tighter; and if it should be released, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes from there, or pain or abscess, then hastens, and releases it, and rages the salve, and addresses what has come to the cures; then renews the salve, and holds it so until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large joints after the back, and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are soft; and one feels well through investigation of the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you put equal the breaking, as it should be. And then put a salve, and bind it with a cloth, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is inclining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and breathes short, and all around vomits a great quantity of blood, and this is a grievous affliction, and the ancients have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to drive the breaking away from the back.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come forth if it is not done.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has been done, then he will be healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one should put poultices on the place to draw forth strongly, and this seems like reason; however, there is doubt that the poultice may attract superfluities to the place because of the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the place with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal the bandage around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone that pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the place of the broken rib, and put below one instrument to ward off the pus; and then one must split the bone and pull gently, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure with salves until he is healed. And if abscesses come forth, then put moist cloths in rose oil on the place, and put on the place; and cure the place as needed for the abscess, and be patient above the ribcage where it should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the breaking comes to the bone of the neck, and it bends little; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are numb and feel well when one stretches and pricks them, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one applies treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents in his hands, and on his back there is ventosity and evacuation without voluntary movement; and when one has stirred him up on his belly, there is evacuation without voluntary movement. And when he is stirred up on his back and wants to ease, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not take care of himself in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not come to him, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is calmed; then put on a comforting and drying salve, and bind it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover with a cloth; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large, by stitching, then cure with ointment anointing flesh, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", then put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the salve and cloth on, if you need to; then bind it, and if there are dislocated bones, then make them straight again, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Rarely does the hip bone break, and if it does, then it happens only a little bit of shortening at the top; and becomes long, and inclines downward, and comes to the patient with pain and piercing, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch your hand up, as far as you are above the breaking; and know what the breakage is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then put equal to that breakage, until it is in natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is long or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then put on the poultice, and then put on a piece of birch bark or of horn, and hold the binding tight, so that it does not move; and fill up the space below the ribs, until the parts are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side with their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess subsides, then do not touch it, until the abscess has subsided; and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the back and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of two manners: of which one is that you take a piece of straight wood, about the thickness of a thumb, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind it with two knots, and bend it upwards, and have the patient sit on a stool; then throw their broken arm onto the wood, so that it comes to the elbow, and has about half a span of wood, then bend it over some heavy thing or let the assistants stretch it down; then put the binding even with their hands together, until the binding returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hatreil, and bind their hand to their neck; then instruct two assistants to have one hold what is above the binding in their hands, and the other stretch down to every knot, and extend each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then bind one knot below the binding, and another above the binding, and have each assistant stretch to their part. And if the binding is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put a knot in the middle below the stool, and another towards the back, under the binding; and also if the binding is towards the back, you must put a lighter knot, without effort, until the binding is even on the shoulder, and on the back; then set the binding even as it should be, and hold it, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, then do not bind it at all for seven days, and put a poultice on the binding in a linen cloth soaked in rose oil, until the abscess subsides; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the poultice on the binding, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the wrapping, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, then use splints, and put on the binding a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one or two spans of space, and be each splint so large that it passes over the binding three spans from each side; then bind on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the binding, more strongly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the splints and the binding, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then let it be for seven days, just as we have said; then look at each three days, whether prickling or swelling does not come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If so, proceed, just as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the binding except after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and put a linen pillow under the shoulder, and watch each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not move, or become slackened the bindings; then proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle things; and when they begin to recover, it should be thick. And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be taken up in forty days from all; and then you must remove and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, you should wait one day or two months before removing it.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fasciculus", one of which is small and is the one that supports the elbow; and the other is large, and is the one that lies below, towards the little finger. Sometimes only the large fasciculus breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fasciculus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is poor, and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is the small fasciculus that has been broken alone, then it should be gently stretched a little bit, and set even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large fasciculus, then it should be bound more tightly; and stretch it on a pillow, and hold the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the others, and have the patient cross his arms over himself, and a pillow in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch one assistant's arm to the part below their hand, or to a strap, and another assistant above. And then set it as the mire sees fit, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the breaking has fragments, then put each one in its place; and if there is one that is loose and can be grasped with the horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the breaking, I spoke of it in the chapter on singular wounds; then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there appears a hot abscess, then apply one layer of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and wrap one layer subtly above the abscess until it is calmed down. Then remove the cerote, and put on the ointment with egg yolk powder, then put on the splints, and make sure the splint of the breaking is thicker and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be 7 or more splints in various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and bind it more tightly above the breakage than at other parts, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and be the drapes above the breakage soft and moist, not hard nor dry; and be the thread that holds it, made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And restore the member and the binding after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Et if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must bathe the member with hot water until those itches are calmed; and let the member not at all rest tightly. Then recommence stretching, and if the ligament is softened and the bone relaxed, and similar thing, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it slightly and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes in, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have said do not come to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days or thereabouts, and then lift his hands up to his neck, and make his necks even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruising is restored in 30 days or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and in the fingers it often happens that there are breakages, and only sometimes does pleasure come.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits straightly in front of him evenly; then puts his hand on the outstretched cloth, and stretches the minister's broken bones, and makes them equal to the sight, until they are well joined; and applies the poultice and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then sets a splint according to the quantity of the swelling; and is enveloped in one wrap of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is around the pad of the finger near the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be as hard as the flesh of the hand, and strain it, as is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is at the tip, then it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another below in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage comes to one of our fingers, and it's the thumb, then set it straight as is necessary; and strain with the finger, and if you see that you must put a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and not move; and if the breakage is on another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; or tie them all together in one holding, as seems best, or put a splint on top like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscess, and support what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken shin
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shinbone is often broken, and well seen when it turns before and behind; and the restoration is such that one bandage is placed above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each minister's bandage to its equal part; and that is when the breakage is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is near the root of the shin, then one bandage goes towards the elbow, and the other bandages below the breakage. And similarly if it is near the knee, and then put the bandages on the knee, and extend downwards; then place the mirror so that the bone is even to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, if hot abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, then let it subside and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in the same manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the breakage with one bandage made of doubled cloth in two or three layers, and leaving any superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the shin and the leg, below the knee, and let the ends of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the shin the bandage, then place splints on the breakage, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then apply a poultice eight days between the leg and the shin made of soft cloths to even out the straining, then begin to bind tightly three or four times around the breakage; and as you go above the breakage, and less strain it; then come back down below to the heel of the thread, so that you come up below the foot; and strain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless some abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is, then loosen it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it is necessary to sew them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and draw out the fragment; and care for it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the shin is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, just as in the shoulder and arm; although, in this restoration made, it does not bother the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the shin is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is often breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it's just a fissure, or one perforation, and has to be all wrapped, and without wrapping, and this feels well enough.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you set equal those things which are rent to their parts, until they are assembled as much as one can; then apply the poultice, and put a round splint if necessary, and strain it as is necessary, then reward all the dispositions that we have said for other breakages, whether hot abscess or other similar thing; and set each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "tibia" and the other is called "fibula"; and it has all sorts of breakages as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done equally with that of the arm, and the work is all alike.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns everywhere.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, so it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and turns below. Then apply an extension, set it equal, and bind the splints equally; but always, it is necessary to consider whether the break is ugly and there are many pieces, so that the extension be less and more gentle; and ease it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of cedar wood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap it in two layers with a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; some people give one piece of wood as long as the leg, and use cedar, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this at the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; then care for it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the toe is affected, and there are only a few exceptions in more or less conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones overlapping one another, so set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; then place your foot now on their sole, at the spot where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their place; then put the poultice and compresses on top, and under the foot of the foot a small plate with two full hives, then bind it to the foot accordingly, after you have wrapped drapery around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers; then put a splint on each broken toe according to its length, and make it a little wider; then put that plate under the foot that I mentioned, and bind it accordingly; and if there are two or three or more broken, put a splint on each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and bind the plate under the foot; and let it be so that the top of the plate is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then bend her towards the back part and keep her held by the rear; then fill the vaginal opening with cotton and put in as much as one stone; then remove the woman, lift the back slightly and slowly, and then the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the natural bone, and the bone will return to its place with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for about seven days or around: then the break will be restored, and if you see, take a goat's bladder, tie a cord to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the natural opening; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it in this way as we have said about the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it and pays attention to my book. For the break indicates the right path of restoration in many dispositions: heed this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for someone who has a break with a wound, whether it be great like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then wash it with vinegar, if you have nothing else, and then continue to restore the break in the same hour or day, unless there is an abscess that comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent above the knee uncovered, it is necessary that you set it in place slightly with your hands, to a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not ready to be put in place by your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers or length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, depending on what he needs for each cure of a break; and be straight and a little thick, so that it does not bend at all under compression on the member in your work, and be curved forward, and thick from the middle going forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved nails be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it returns to its place, and be equal to each other. And if the break is small, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the tip of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it off with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a saw or file, to your ability; then take out what remains in the bone of roughness and small scales.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So make sure it is in its place, then wet one cloth in black stiptic wine, and use it properly; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound unless it has oil, so as to bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut off all the covering around it, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have brought about death or corruption on the patient some time; and the bandages should be softer and more gentle than those used for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	Et if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil occurrences will not happen, as we have said, and you find pain at the location, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but instead, wrap hard cloths around, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days the bow of the wound appearing, then remove everything you had put on with all wine, and apply ointment for healing wounds, just like tetrafarmacum and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members be arranged in such a way that the bow runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens to happen many days, and it cannot heal but the bow returns, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a tent, and remove all these uneven pieces that bring about that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes to the location, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great members, do not pull it out; for many times death ensues, but leave it until it can be removed; by chance it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of blisters that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see after the healing of the swelling, namely when it is near the jointure, and it is a bad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the members cannot perform their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore if the wound is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and mixing them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and apply it to the joint at night in an estoup, and press it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it on a piece of linen well made; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swelling from the members; and if the swelling has already been converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity apparent; or give it to any barber, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and remains after the member weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or due to excessive inflammation; or due to great movements, but not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and cause their body to become tender, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and relaxation; then apply poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and inflammation often subsides with lukewarm water, until nourishment flows into the member; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, though it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and this work is blameworthy, and great evils come from it, and by chance death ensues; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with hot water, or cooking soft herbs such as those of mallow, and roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a soothing plaster, such as one made from dyaquilon well prepared, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fat figs, and grind them with rye flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And at no time is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged friction with many moist things. And administer gentle movement to the member each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened and toughened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cut just to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply caution and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring them back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, it is set in place with great pain at the joint; therefore, do not move them to the hour when they are swollen: many times bring shame and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, make the patient well again, then leave them alone until the abscesses are calmed; then rise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters of dislocations from top to toe.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated and downwards, and the dislocations of both sides occur in two manners: either they are slightly removed from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang down towards the chest, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and involuntarily wrap his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and insert the mirror's spatula into one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and with the other two hands, they should be free to apply equal pressure; and command the patient to soften their jawbones and move them from all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician sets it equal, until it recovers to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is returned with difficulty, especially when the two jawbones are together, if they have been loosened by hot water and oil, so that you return them slightly; do not force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned to their equal place, and the mouth of the patient is well moistened, then put on damp cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and tie it lightly with soft ligatures;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on his back, and his jaws are between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he strain himself to masticate, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are set.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he takes what he wants lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth while eating or drinking, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their point within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and habitual sweats come, and perhaps colic, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence; and many times the person dies from whom it happens, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from inside the chest towards the back and in a continuous motion of the shoulder blade and the ribcage, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can feel this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms; then presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on a poultice and bandage, and tighten it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head of the shoulder that is towards the back cannot be dislocated; if it cannot, and if it does dislocate once, then return it to its place, as we have said; then put on a poultice and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and similarly, bring back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the part of the ribcage; and perhaps dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and many times dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for to them it happens suddenly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps a little and returns a little.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or crushing, and the shoulder becomes swollen with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it thoroughly, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes downward towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find on the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket where the top of the shoulder touches the armpit, just as if it were an ox's; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the armpit.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this way of dislocation is not difficult to return when it is new, or if the patient is young.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the attendants lift the patient's hand up high, then put their fingers below the socket, and lift the jointure up to its place by force; and the attendants lift the hand again, and stretch it up high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said within three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should use a gentle and soothing mixture, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and bring it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on his back, and a wad of wool put below the socket, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician should place their heel on the wad, and lift the top of the shoulder properly, and draw the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another attendant should hold the patient's head, so that it does not move downward; then this shoulder will return right now, and if you see that it is being returned in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient be present; and he should stand directly in front of the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the socket of the patient's shoulder, and lift the socket up high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another attendant should draw the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then they can lift something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is also restored in another way: and that is by placing a long iron spike into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder fits just like a pistol, and not too big nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then be placed below the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient should be standing at the end of the stick; then his hand should be stretched down on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms in length and three fingers in width, which has the head rounded to fit easily into the socket below the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie soft cloths on top of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it below the socket of the patient's shoulder; and stretch one arm up over the long rod, and tie the assistant on the rod, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a shelf of a wide basket, and let the hands down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is applied, in whatever manner it may be, you should place below the armpit an equal wool sphere, then put the plaster on top of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the armpit properly, and turn the string over the plaster, and bind the hand to one's neck, and let the remaining hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he massage little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then massage more after five days or seven, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is sound.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated from its place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauterizations to three pores, as it is written before in the chapter of cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after seven days it dislocates again, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast, or shoulders, or back, is made by impulse and stretching of hands, and it should be treated in another way; and care for it until it is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times, until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the hip
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the hip is displaced in a way, and comes back in a way; and is displaced from all sides, and just as much before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and displaces according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the diseased hip with the healthy one, then it can be seen clearly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot flex the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscess does not come to life, for if the abscess were to come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is in the back; thus it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you should stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mire according to the hip around, above, and below, and bind the joint to its shoulders together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the hip which is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mire has joined the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is back in place, put on a dry plaster with some egg yolk, and bind tightly, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it stay for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the string, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the string, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels swelling after the resetting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe him well and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he bathes, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is sound; and if you see that it helps, apply moist heated valerian fien with butter, and bind it on; and it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is displaced and returns lightly, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same place where it was displaced, so that the swelling subsides or an abscess does not form hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is such that you place the diseased hand on a board, and extend the fingers of the ministers, and have the mire put it even, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and binds it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Furthermore, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a board for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the board, and the mire place their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then bind emplausters calming abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the deformed joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and nothing but harm comes to the patient until his hands are softened, and he cannot flex anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to stretch by applying cauterizations in the case, and perhaps it is not worth anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when his hands are back in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water, and rub it gently until he is sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes are dislocated the two bones of the hand to each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then the two bones are repositioned and hold the dislocation in place as long as it recovers, then support the head of the bone and guide it towards the part where it is separated;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be for two days, and then make it even that day; and bind the joint with a bandage, as we have said, and loosen it by day, and move it, and bind the joint again; and do this often until it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excretions jump forth without will, nor can they be held, and many times some member is softened, or the two thighs or one arm.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the dislocation moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the cure is that you correct if the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no correction nor healing of the whole thing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure are spoken in great words, but there is not much benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbositez which comes to the breast beforehand, there is no remedy nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure more than that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one place even, and have a strain under him, so he does not get hurt;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then stick one iron bar into the ground firmly, and another near his feet, and bind a strap across the joints of the patient, and one to his hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two attendants know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron bars;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the iron bars as we have said, and the attendants put their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this cure, take a table three arms long, and place it under the appearance, and have the patient sit on the side, and put the head of the table under the appearance, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and have the attendants put their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it recovers its place; and if you see, then do so to the pivot which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you stick two iron bars into the head of the patient, one arm long, and towards the feet two others, and have between each bar, a palm's width apart.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each iron bar one hole, where the pivot runs, and be the bars firmly stuck in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two bars be one turning bar, above which the strap turns, and have in the two turning bars two small iron bars, a palm's width long, to turn the pivot.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then bind the strap that is between the joints to the pivot towards the head, and the other strap towards the feet to the other pivot, and each of the attendants turns his own pivot with all the strap, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then apply a drying poultice with plenty of egg white, and then bind the swelling, and then draw out a tablet three arms long, which will straighten the place of the gilbositez and the part of the spine that is sound, then bind it with a strap, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes to the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the poultice that we have said before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of linseed.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes an appearance comes to the back of the spine, and it seems like dislocation; and that is the bone which opens, therefore one must not have presumption about this: by chance death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come except from dislocation alone, nor does it come as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more so within than without, and less so before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the ailing leg with the sound one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the sound one, and the patient cannot flex their kneecap inwards.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the place that is below the swelling of abscesses hot, because the head of the thigh bone comes away.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from behind is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from before is that his leg is well-shaped according to its completion; however, he does not flex his kneecap without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot at first, and holds back his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, he passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from behind is that he cannot stretch his kneecap nor flex it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in the place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you correct if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its condition, there being no remedy; and there is no need for one to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of three kinds of dislocations, you must hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and there is no need for another remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong servant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands or with one tie above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another servant extends his hand above in the same manner that he presses his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft tie above the thigh; and another ties the head of the strap;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and stretch all up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the parting place, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then put the strap on the root of the thigh, and the bolt that is below the angle, then stretch the strap high towards the angle, and towards the hollow;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then take hold of another servant's arms and encircle the thick strap of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out far forth: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft strap on both heels and both kneecaps, and let the diseased leg be stretched out two fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then be suspended on the top of a beam, and be above the ground two arm's length; then instruct one servant to encircle the head of the thigh, and let another servant hang with the patient, who encircles the thigh strongly, for the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the end, then the patient lies down, as we have said in one who has gilboiseity, and tightens one strap on the diseased leg properly, and on the hip also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two pincers, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one pincer between the patient's thighs in the middle.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not hurt, then stretch each servant towards him, and the barber sets equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, put on the table and press thus as we have said in the gilboiseity, and let the patient lie down on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to stretch out the diseased leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put the barber's hand on top of the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the end, then it is not necessary to stretch out the patient down or lift him up onto the earth, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated at the end, as we have said about the couching on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on his face, and the strap stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if it rests three days or four, then release it, and put the poultice on; and if you see that they are even, then strain, as before, and leave it. Three days; then release it, and let him go gently, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not bend to his hip, know that he is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch out his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your palms and bring it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another servant stretches out his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg gently back into its hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the poultice on, and make the leg come back to the hip, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then release him; and do not bother the patient to walk until his limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, then administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until he is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is sometimes sprained and sometimes fully dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch it gently with one's hands when it is only sprained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is fully dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and have one servant hold him firm by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and press the foot up nicely.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then re-do the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and stick one pincer firmly into the earth between his thighs, and wrap damp cloths around, so that he does not hurt.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have the servant hold the thigh, and another servant stretch out the foot to his hands or to one strap, which he ties on the calf of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch out each servant evenly, and the pincers be placed thus between the thighs of the patient to retain him when one is stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put the mirrors on both sides of the dislocation to his hands, and another servant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the poultice and compresses on top, and strain firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so the bandage is not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage has loosened, strain again; then release it on the fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear there, it is necessary to heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are relaxed, you should stretch them gently without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, you should make the patient sit on one level or on six feet straight, and put your foot on what appears to be the joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there appears to be nothing, put a board under the sole of the foot, two inches thick, then strain firmly, and leave it three days, then release it; and make it rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not unassuming in your treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are pitiful and merciful and slow, rather than hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use gentle things at the beginning to calm down the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset now the limb to its place, so that the hot abscess comes.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is back in place, administer gentle things to calm down the hot abscess, and treat the wound with dried ointments, as is fitting.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is breaking with the dislocation, and small bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and take care not to fall into the path of fear, as I have said, for it is worthily done according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the romance of physics
