O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I must complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and has been entirely lost everywhere, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in old books that have been moved by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is estranged the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will bring it back to life by organizing this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abridgement; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools of work, accompanied by the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of vertebrae, and the behavior and moving and resting muscles, and from the source of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that a name with a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, should beware lest he fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted many times to warn those who undertake this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew that he would die if it was not removed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took on the treatment of a duke from our land who had his leg broken and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant surgeon held the break over the wound by strong force, not leaving the wound even an inch of space, and left it in this state until the leg became completely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to arrive to set the leg free; and when I had loosened it so he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in all ways the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who opened up an inflamed abscess and then inflamed it even more through the wickedness of his procedure.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that everything that is corrupt can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, you must needs know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Por quoi il est besoig que vous vous en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vous. Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vous venez à salut et soyez loez; et lassiez les maladies espourables de grief sanite; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vous fait douter, et aiez foit en vous si que vous puissiez venir de cesti monde à l’autre de gloire.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien said in some of his warnings: "Do not take heed to any bad disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicine cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, in order that we remember our work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization aids universally in every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with dry matter and dry temperament with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have disagreed and said that cauterization is great aid; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth anything for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat or dryness for a hot disease; and that person who said the opposite says that cauterization makes great aid in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true some time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, do not meddle with it unless you are one who has tried it and knows through long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the chances and risks of the time; as for other temperaments, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is a secret of cures, and of greater good than burning cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is burned, and does no harm to any other member if one does not name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines come from member to member by approaching, and bring grievous diseases of unhealthy sanitation; and by chance kill the patient. The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this in experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which is bound up with fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; so receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is put under by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine in terms of its speed of action, and virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a possibility that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and superfluous things are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time or place where there is excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in some disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more potent than those of iron, and they did not say this for anything other than the quality of gold and its excellence in substance; and they said that the place where the cauterization is done does not do harm, but this is not true because I have tried it, and found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it becomes quickly cooled down; and if you heat it too much, they melt in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use burning cauterization because we have found it to be advantageous to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more easy to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are worth for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two ways to do this because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pain in the dens and pain in the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can bear; and then make the patient's head redden.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your weight; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let it come to your two middle fingers, so that it bleeds a little then apply the cauterization which is called "olivare", whose form this is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it go down and out by moving your hand slowly and gradually to the side; then lift your hand suddenly, and repair the spot if you see the bone one small step; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of silk, and put it in a soft and fluffy cotton pad, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; after that apply a moist cloth to butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacy" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and therefore it is helpful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should cauterize so much above, and push it in so hard that the bone is as wide as a thread that women put into their purses for this reason that the humors may flow out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that one should heal and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a lack of courage; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and moistening for me, and from this use I work for the salvation of my body.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain from the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes from the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's pills and powders called "cochie", and purgatives for the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have spoken of before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's head is of strong constitution, and not too cold; then cauterize below that previous cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and keep your hand so steady that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head's cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes from one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely by hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterizations by hot medicine are such that you take a dose of aloes, remove the bark and regrind it into a small amount to be used for two eyes; then make an incision on the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can put the aloes under the skin; and when it has been put under the skin, tie and tighten it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and let the aloes juice flow out for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice of butter so that it starts to ooze.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the poultice treatment, as long as it is healed; and if you see that this method does not work, then do what some burning medicines that I have written or treatise on burning medicines prescribe.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery to its form.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or a small bowl, and it has a slight curvature; and one puts it on the painful place, and holds one's hand and turns the iron slightly until the half of the spoon-shaped part of the key is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and stop the abundant bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton on the wound and leave it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations by hot medicine and fire do not work, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful place a line half a digit long, and lift your hand once, and strain yourself so that you don't cut the artery and don't touch right up to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially for one who does not know how and is not an expert; and leave the work in my hands; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat up this cauterizing iron called "poins" in the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is on both sides, and remove it a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterizations for similar things that come from scorched nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this likeness of torment that is caused by phlegm and idleness, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the juncture of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery right above the ear on top of the horn-shaped part of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a finger's breadth; and leave the cautery there until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the likeness of the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after that, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	To this illness it is fitting to give the patient great and many pills for the brain; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occiput a poultice made of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations around the head from top to neck, with a space of two fingers between each cauterization, and treat him as the others, and if you see anything swollen or inflamed, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until he is cleansed; and that cauterization which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it so that as much of the gallbladder as is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards, treat until he is cleansed, and it is the cauterization which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meat; afterwards, wash the chief in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is the olivier cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thick phlegm is produced, then make those cauterizations as we have said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After wash the head of the patient; after make one linen tourniquet well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and the patient's head be crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and mix well with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it temperately so that the thread can bear being dipped in it; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for one treatment, with good governance, until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it is necessary to cauterize elsewhere, making several points on the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cauterizing moistens the brain sufficiently; and then put on a wet cloth in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the inflammation of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When inflammation comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and keep him from all moistures, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After command him to wet his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending of inflammation is to both eyes together, or to one; and stop all the veins and arteries that are under the gallbladder, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stanch it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stanch it; and never make a cauterization or haterel under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of inflammation descending to the eyes: one cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on the temples, and two cauterizations or haterel under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow at each small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears of the heart within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three raw eggs; afterwards wash his head, and make a cauterization on the middle of the olivary cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the eyebrows, a little below the hairline; and beware of not cutting off the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this iron called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	to its form.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand off until one third of the paper has been burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points at the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted to the inside, and points at the oil, and it makes one cauterization according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hair as long and equal as it is; and if they point at their birthplace, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then the patient places it in his own sound; afterwards signs above the paper of eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs; then he puts damp cotton on egg white and muscillaige of persilium on the eye, then heat the cautery where there is the form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have signed bit by bit many times, until the scars are burned away in that place; and the sign of health from the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put damp cotton on butter until the scarring is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until he is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start again the cautery on the same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each a third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the form that you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the disease is held in one eye only, one must work in one, and if in both alike; and put damp cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in his own sound and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press a little bit and move it all the times that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the burning as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, then lift the bandage of cloth, and if you see the parchment lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then put more medicine on the wound or if the medicine has no effect, until your works are equal and your eyes put in order; then put on a wet cloth in butter until the burned parts fall off, after curing the bandage of ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work so that you do not make a mistake in the eyes of those skilled in medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then continue the treatment on that same spot which has been softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after curing it until it is healed; and this is the form of the healing of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this is your constriction; and do not be surprised if the right path is not shown to him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on the treatment of fistulas using cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and take the messenger's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or leave its head; afterwards put damp cotton on egg white or juice of persilium on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: and shape the chief as if it were the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, so be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out the bowel; afterwards put hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nerve above the eye, so that your hands do not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, then it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again once more, and if needed again, and let it be for three days; after that put on a moist cloth in butter, and treat with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and reset according to what will come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	You understand the fistula, and open it up; then put in the subtle chamomile ointment which is the remedy.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of one third of a bean; and hold your hand or caustic firmly, and do not move the patient's head until the melted wax does not run into his eye; and it is necessary that you put on the eye of the patient damp cotton in egg white or in earth: the wax so opens up the place of fistula, and cures by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the needle, and bring back the fistula to its natural place according to what is fitting for each joint.
des crevaices en levres	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on cracks in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times occur cracks in lips that are called "piles", and indeed in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it in those cracks quickly, until it comes out clean; afterwards heal the wound with ointment until he is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on abscesses of the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or at the roots of the teeth; and it has become putrid and rotten and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards fill up or plug the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools down to the fontanelle, and at the back; and do so once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until he is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	Movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your shoulder; afterwards, apply the cautery in this manner as if you were putting a cord around the tooth; and put hot hastiness inside the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour and richly flowing fever.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are now confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, either there is cold or warmth, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two manners: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it into a iron or earthen spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in hot butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do many times until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put a hot iron there until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterizations together with fire are such that you take a dog iron or of brass, and it should be large enough so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; after that, heat the cautery, from which the form will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the preparation of this fire cauterization, and then let it burn; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterizer in whatever shape you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the cord:
des scrophules	of scrofulae
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulae are of fluid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire cauterization as described below, with two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, as needed, until it comes to the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and wrap with damp cotton in butter until the blister is removed; afterwards, treat the swelling and tenting until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails on the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after which do a fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come right up to the throat, and burn no more than a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that do another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and make it a "clavicle" which is the form we have before; and care for the place as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the thorax is of cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and it is an old illness, then apply two cauterizers on the breast in the armpits; and another cauterizer inside the chest between the breasts; and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do a fire cautery all the way through the "points" which is called "pointing" for which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and make the points up to thirty or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the limb according to what is said before, and let the fire cauterize at three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of that the cauterizer is lighter, because you make three in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, place the patient on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift the skin that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly, then apply the cauterizer which has two handles like this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the skin until it is perforated up to the side, and the figure of the cauterization comes out with three cauterizers; and because of that, the cauterization is done with the cauterizer that has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization are six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is applied on one nerve, for which there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After that, put the cauterizer on and sprinkle it with powder; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little else happens then, so make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterizing nail or many cauterizations that are pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and dryness has been removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach, as long as they bring it back to its natural state, and multiple cathartics occur in him, and accustomed remedies are tried but do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make three cauterizations below the ribs as far as the length of a thumb, all along the cauterizing nail, and two cauterizations on each side so that the figures of the cauterizations are at three angles, and have such space between one and another that they will not be joined together when they gush forth; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they pierce both parts of the key, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without addition.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a great fire cautery applied to the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, apply it with pricking and sign above the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see by measure; then apply the entire cautery called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is greatly disturbed from its natural complexion by excess; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit him, then the patient must be covered on his hearth; and sign above three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, beneath the ribs, where the man's breast comes; and there should be space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and the cauteries should be long as the length of the body, and do not press at all with your hand on the entire cautery; and it should be burned only half way through the quarter, and the patient should be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then he should sit, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	Et if thou desirest, then cauterize these cauteries with the cutler, if thou art subtle and wise in the art, and take heed that thou dost not burn all the way to the core, for thou wouldst dry up the whole body; and let it not come just to boiling point, for the cores are very subtle thereabouts, and thou knowest this indeed.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the fatty part of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the fatty part, the patient feels no more than moderate pain; and if it is in the membrane, they feel excessive pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when the cure was done by the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his head; and then sign over the location where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, of which there is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautery so long as the fires are burned, and come just to the sphac, so long as the pore is completely furrowed; after the cure according to the cure of diseases until he is healed; and it does not need that any one other than he who has studied long in the art of medicine should use this cautery, by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Of the cauterization of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations of aristologe roots for pleurisy, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and burn it with fire, and apply one cauterizer between the breastbone and the neck, and two small cauterizers just below that in the part that is beneath the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cauterizer inside the chest, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest after the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but rather apply it openly just as in perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And certain old men said that one should use a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heat it up and put it between the ribs, so long as it comes to the abscess; and then the pain will cease, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not help, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce du cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce du cors.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you put the two nerves inflamed so that the keur is pierced from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four; if you see, then cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the healing when it has taken long time, and this is worth more than the other remedies previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work on dropsy, except by the method called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure him according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the edge of the flesh.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the cauterizer open to gather purulence for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and salvation would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is the same as the one we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was put here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in the person who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the pinky; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far inwardly, thus fierce citrines may arise, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the index finger; and let the cauterizers be of length, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizers open for a long time without curing, until the moisture subsides; after that, do the cures of the other cures we have said.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the menses come from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great vitality, then make one large cauterization on the stomach according to what was said before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the circulatory cauterizer; and three cauterizations around the belly fine as each single cauterizer is fine, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the armpit, and one cauterization on each side, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and they are ancient and consist of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, if you do fire cauterization: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely beneath the almecdate tree and gradually increases in triangular shape, and one cautery below the jawbone two digits; and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and the face begins to inflate, then a large cautery is applied on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the navel for all the cautery nails; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure, let the wound be until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the scrofula which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the Thelul, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then put it entirely ablaze on that Thelul coping; and I leave your hand until the cauterizers come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows forth; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments which are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on the Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an ill-cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes and is inflamed and discharges foul matter and corrupted moisture, then you should carefully examine the whole tent [tentorium] and know exactly how deep it is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery that appears to be shallow, plug it into the fistula according to the quantity of matter that has entered the tent [tentorium], and reapply the cautery until all those foul and corrupted substances are burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and take care not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula extends to the bladder and intestine, then take care of those parts, and only make fires that are covered with earth, and think they are not harmed; after the cure, let the wound be until it is healed, and if the parts are swollen, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the part is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the part is troubled, and corrupted the bone at its base; and thus as one of those things we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the sickness of kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windiness, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and another at the cauterized clavicle that we have said before; and if we catarize in medium, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do more great help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the outside of the part where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, each one as long as a finger's breadth; and make one cauterization behind the back, if you need two; and let the cauterized clavicle be according to the form said before.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not cease to conceive because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that one makes three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the fire cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterized clavicle be as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the groin of the crotch, and because of this the patient moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lump of the departure vein is found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the crotch at one cauterization similar to a circle, and sign before the lump around the groin as it turns, so that the groin be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three large cauterizations of the olivaire, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the quarters; and care for it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin of the crotch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: that is to know together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the boil of the groin three triangular cauteries in this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery the width of an elbow, and be the cauteries olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the chief of the groin, therefore there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterization is in the shape of a circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the groin; but make it in this manner that the circles contain all the groin, and all the spaces of the quarter be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the groin and does not reach as far as the hip nor as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the hip and leg, one makes two cauteries on the side where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle four finger-widths to the left; and be the cauteries knife-like, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the two toes or almost there, one cauterizes at the point where they feel the pain three points or four on the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary to do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the kneecap towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutellaire or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave too much of the burning nor burn the main arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all over the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, do a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say in the fire cautery of the groin, this is the manner: make it such that the iron be at the head as thick as a walnut of dactyl, or a little less, and be between the fingers, and be of the same width from one finger to another, a span's length; and the intervals be about two parts, and also like beans, and it should have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, and be scalded until it is completely red and gives off a burning sensation,
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this fire treatment due to fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine is such that you make an instrument to fit between the margins of the door, and it be made of earth or iron with a length of one pace, and in the height have two nodes, and between each node have the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and be open above and below, and join together as this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Put the caustic on the back of the patient lying on their side, and then place your hand above the caustic; after that, pour between the two circles of hot water which has been heated over the fire one pot, and let it stay for an hour or a time, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds a burning like fire; and when the biting is gone, lift your hand with the instrument and lift off the caustic of soft water, and let it be thus for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the burning is removed; and leave it for three days before it becomes rotten; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the hip or the leg, make the instrument that holds according to what you have done in the groin correctly; and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot water, equal parts of each, and grind them together, and put it in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or there is a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter; and put this pot into another pot well weighted, and put above alkali and hot water and sweet water on top, until you have two layers of powder above which you will have well prepared in your hand; and leave it thus until the sweet water descends to the bottom of the pot, then take all that sweet water and pour it on hot water and alkali just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and is administered in motion of medical works and other cauterizations of members; for it does a work like fire, and also has other medicines which are well cauterized with honey, anacardium, and chalices with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was done, and he was healed only once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself just as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in the same way that you take fresh and dry green taro, and grind it much with a little piece of grease, and put it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it there for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning any more.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed up, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away altogether and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery on such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fire, it helps a lot; and the cauteries should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb and the toe that is called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take goat's hair when it is dry, and put it in the fire until it is charcoal, and place it on the linen, and let it stay until it is extinguished; and do it again like this, and do not stop doing it like this as long as you think with your senses that he will come to good health, and that the pain will cease; and this method of cauterization is called "goat's hair cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain from the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bloodletting, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterization, unless it comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be voided of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked out by inches, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be done according to the "poins" cautery; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the nail-like middle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow space when they arise, and fear; and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and in our appearance which comes on top of other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize it at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery treats each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize around the spine with the fire at two or three points, and let the points be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a place of swelling which is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of the joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which apothecaries properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then apply cauterization to all the cauterization we claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to just above the knee and to other joints, and this often happens, then apply cauterization on each knee three or four times to all of the olivary cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand back until the marrow of the bone is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the joint; and if there remains no pain at all, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the armpits, cauterize each part, and make good governance of the patient and use medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the route of the scarabaeus beetle shell
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When itching comes in angers, and the boils descend to the groin and this is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it to be cured, he does not eat at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the phlegm descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then reposition them at your fingers, and mark out under the itching on the bone of the elbow, and in all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then cauterize as this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	so long as it is white and gives off a sweet smell.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reposition the bowels to their place; and the attendants hold his hand so that he does not return; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the hips, and another on the chest holding his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of all your hand, and hold it straight and hold until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again as many times as necessary to reach the bone; and beware carefully so that the bowels do not burst when you make the cautery, nor burn him, nor kill the patient or cause another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come right to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their size, and of great people also great according to their measure; after three days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the scabbing is removed; after curing other ointments as long as they are healed, and have the patient lie on their back for 40 days such that the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that their bandages be loosened long enough so that the boils do not burst when he will need to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, give him a good-made bandage and wrap it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, that he trouble himself little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of loud shouting; and when he has received this instruction, then he is whole and entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say next about the cutting treatment in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the itching of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bodies and are known, and you see they do not grow anymore, then do the fire cautery on the fire according to its quantity, and let it be burned at the third degree of heat; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize the ulcer with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the first sign at the beginning and draw a line for the width above the ulcer, and another below, and lead your hand through all the cauterized area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more fragile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in some member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, either from falling or hurting, and that pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cure does not work, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauterization be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and pains.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cautery, that's well; if not, start another one on top of it, for such cases are accustomed to change in the member that is closest, therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Surgeonship
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The joints are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putridity of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption may prevail over all the patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: one in the middle of the head to nine, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on each horn, and one behind on the back of the neck; and leave your hand there until the cauterization comes up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the surgeonship is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauterizations we have said on the head, and one cauterization inside the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the crupper and another below, and two on each of the shoulders; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more it helps him, and brings greater benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because his body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, lay him on a bed of flour with honey and other treatments until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but he is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cautery be a little entering into the flesh of the limb; then treat him with salves until he is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at times one has done a cautery and on the hand and foot and back, to the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is removed the swelling; and yet no one intervenes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and issues of nerves moving within the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "ulcers" is inflamed, and the skill of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes it with a cauterization, somewhat deep, according to the thickness of the knee flesh, until the white discharge is removed, and its color changes; then cure with a poultice made of flour, lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning and you wish to arrest it, then cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once or twice; and a more straightforward thing is to cauterize around it, with the "circule" cautery, as we have said in many previous cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of inflammation that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati" and it tarries from dying or because of the superfluity it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries in piercing; after that leave it so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it bursting forth at all the cauterization, then heat the cauterization where there is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them externally in just that way that the course of purging be eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After he is cured to perfection.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of a member, for it wastes away members just as fire wastes away dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can endure the fire cautery together, then sharpen the cauteries very small and great, according to what is necessary for the place or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all corruption, and nothing remains of it, except that which is corrupted be taken out.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the cauterized places that suffer burns with oil until the scorchings of fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments brings forth flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good; and if not, then re-cauterize the area remaining from the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy is sometimes used in place of fire cauterization by medicine; but nonetheless, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet due to foreign matter a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large abscess that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery of this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery to a fine point like a vulture's feather, and make it of good iron to its measure so that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and have subtle margins; afterwards put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to decay; then apply a poultice of wild marjoram crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by an external force on the body, and many times occur in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply a hot water cautery; and thus: take a clay or iron pipe, or a bone from a vulture, and place it on the lump and the altiul, that is to say, porridge-colored moles; and place the pipe so that it surrounds everything entirely, then put in a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn, so that the edge of the pipe comes to the root of the lump, and can find the hot water pathway all the way down to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and he will be pulled out from all his roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So that you do an after another, until you have removed all those within the body, then cure the swellings that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shake from chilliness or numbness, or quartan fever, or another, it is necessary that you make him .iiii. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the weight, and one on the belly at the olive cautery; if he stops shaking, and his health will hasten from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	the smelly boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent on the skin are baths or pustules that come from great corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first that when they appear, one makes a fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, by which the point should be seized by fire, or of a long aristologe root, or a lentiform cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes when one cauterizes them at the beginning as this manner appears, and they cannot grow any further forward, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or from the incision of an abscess, or from the cautery of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and strain mightily until the blood is calmed beneath your fingers, and no more drips out; then put at the fire the olive cauteries, large and small, as many as are red; then take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein which you hold with your two fingers, and hold the cautery until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has stopped, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is staunched; and be mindful that you do not burn the nerve that is below, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stop it without great harm, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be bound and restrained accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will cause stanching of blood will bind it tightly with cloths or put hot things on it, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and strain well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently while it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and staunched; and make an inquiry ahead to get what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the reasons and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head just as far as this, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come into cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have so harmed themselves with their illness that they die easily because of the difficulty they find in their disease, and the greatness of their wickedness; and one should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are some who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not rashly but wisely what you are certain of and can take and have praise; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your sick people, so that salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear friend, may Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy spirit of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from the beginning just as far as this, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the midwife strains too strongly on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen have hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth the trouble to work on such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull was growing thicker each day to the point where it could no longer be sustained; and so moistened that he would have died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the sphenoid, between the key and the bone; and the treatment is such when the moisture is between the key and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two of our fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and behold the shape of the sphenoid:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the head split open from each part, and the fluid jumps far when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions into the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture away.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After, bind the cuts with cloths and powders, and put vinegar and oil in it, and let it be like that for as long as five days; then release it, and treat the wound by tenting and anointing, and let the head be drained equally, and afterwards feed the patient dried meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then at the place where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid, and cut according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of relapse
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone that has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is the fire cautery with which you will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the signs of boils, the patient should bend back their head; after that, scrub the area with a rough cloth as long as the arteries appear, then have the patient pull away their neck from the cloth; then look to see if the vein bleeds, and the flesh on one side and the other are afterwards behind the ears, and that they are repointed; then mark the flesh with an incision, then cut both sides with a sharp instrument for two parts, as long as the skin can be reached to the bone, and all this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above, cutting in the same way as two do across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood springs forth continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign and fill just up to the bone; and what is needed to put out blood is six times, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point the syphac, cut off the aposteme so that no infection comes there, then strain the wound and bind, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in temples and old foreheads and similar things, and it is treated by manners of medical cures and all that does not help him, then we cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back their hair from their temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then the patient tightens their neck with some cloths, then strikes the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then train it above the pincers, and detach well the membranes that are below each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the uncinia, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Because she is not shaped, so does not jump up all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take the blood of .vi. cubits up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two loops of a strong double-threaded silk thread, so that there is no bleeding before the wound heals, and there is no loss of blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with a cauterizing spatula up to the bone until the hairs are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is help to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater help with the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one loosens them, take care of dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents, until he is healed; and if without a pause from the artery as long as you work, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or use vitriol to stop the bleeding; and if you do not have these present, place your cloth on the place so that the bleeding ceases, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as is necessary; and what is main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting spatula, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuttings are too dense, they hold their heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two cutlets one large space of width, and then when you have marked with enchie the two loops, and you heat the iron hot on top until it comes up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two loops; and let them be separated between the two hairs because they are not sealed by this cautery entirely; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine done there, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel or front perspiration like trembling; and so the skin is tender and moist as if the hairs of paper were fallen, and the papers are scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "blunt cure" in old times, and this is what you do to the patient with this disease: give them hair on their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to its length; and one of the incisions should be like two threads all across the forehead from front to back, and the others two at each corner above the eyebrows, and take care not to cut into the arteries which are at each side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jawbones, and make each wound three inches long across the joint; and prepare a piece of sponge and many cloths in order to absorb the blood, then pour the spittle in with two parts of this form.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is near the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two notches right up to the sphenoid bone that is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and put the instrument called "culterelle" in the first notch, and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And set the cutting edge towards the fatty part of the flesh to the vein, and the cutting edge soft towards the bone, and hold it so that it comes to the main fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears of the vein, and then make another incision in the main fissure up to the other side; and then draw out equal blood, and express the place for the taken blood; then put a cloth of old cotton in each fissure, and put moist cloths on top soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not form; and on the third day release the bandage, and administer great abundance of warm water; then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with a long-standing cataract and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papillae burned; and the hair falls out, and the head is in great pain above, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and the cataract do not come from one vein alone, but from many veins, and the mother vein which is there, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to place their forehead backwards, then make a great gash in the forehead and another of about equal width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move with eating; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow onto a sponge, then stop between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton and linen there; then place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and take care to prevent aposteme heat; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with corrosive substances that make flesh ensue.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds in order to bring forth flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stoppering of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of the three things: either grains, or bestial matter, or stone-like substance similar to iron; or seed, such as jaundice, lentils, peas; or flowing substances, such as water and oil, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it pierces the ear or in some other way does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill some violet oil or sesame oil and bring it to the extraction; and make the patient frown with condition, and stop their nostrils when the frowning comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times there is pain with this treatment; and if it does not come forth, bring the extraction by subtle forceps, from which comes the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with the fine pincer of a small pair of forceps; and if it does not come out through this, then make a wire chain and put the head of the chain or perforation of the ear very tight, and block what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it firmly, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from which birds are taken, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a small piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it further.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out through all the things we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear before an aposteme arises and spasms; and the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient down between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or flesh dependent; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as far as you can, and suck on it hastily to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a fine, thin spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and bring an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then bring it out by subtle forceps and a poultice, as we said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In this water that falls in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to frown with condition first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it sit on that ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for that, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of the wire you should hold tight and light, and heat them up in the fire; and put the patient's ear with one or two perforations, and lift it up from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the water comes out, and thus she will jump all out; and if you see, take a joint, and put one of the ends in the ear, and the other end takes fire as long as the most tender joint is burned; then redo the other joints like we have said, until all the water comes out.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the bestial matter, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer extraction with fine tweezers; and that is the easiest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting the vermin from ears, as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear to the sun: if there are any worms, treat them with fine tweezers; if none appear, take a thread of the kind that has the shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And tie the most subtle thread in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull strongly on all the cord; do this often until all the veins emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey by emerging, stop around the cord with cotton as I said in the chapter; and if they do not burst forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the castration of worms, and you will find it or treat the distillations; and distill your oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument, as to which there is the form such as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is narrow below and wide above made of silver or tin, with small holes to distill; and for pressing within the distillation using a well-made tin instrument, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap it around the point with a cotton cloth; then pour your oil or juice into it, and as much of your medicine as you can into the thread, and have the thread in the ear; then put it into the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or trickles from the ear; and if the patient feels within, and the distillation is in a small pot warmed by fire so that one can distill it in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stoppering of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppering a wound or new growth inside the ear, and these stoppers sometimes come very far into the ear so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a small hole and it can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is from a grievous inflammation or multiple dispositions, and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatium as it has the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be rough and scraping in front and back all along, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is from new flesh or the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it away until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is done precisely in the ear, take the subtle razor light and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the operation whose patient feels great pain to hear, pierce lightly, and take care not to trouble the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mummy.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the bleeding stops, then take an sponge and dip it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of paper skin
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This crust that comes on the paper skin of the eyelids when they are moist and dry, then it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and tweezers, and scrape off a spatium from its roots; then put on the surface vitriol broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they peel off without leaving any skin, then the cataract of fine lenticular cautery and the cauterized area after incision is worth nothing; and many times they are repainted, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hare
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in papers from the eyes certain things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on paper above and below; the works are such: take heed if the grandine moves to one side and then the other, and it is a light thing to know; make then the opening wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper slightly, then harm nothing to the patient; and if the opening is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointments restore it soon and repair the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the paper and extract the grandine with fine tweezers, and scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it doesn't harm anything; and when the grandine is scraped off, pour vinegar water into the ear and cure the part that removed flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is spread on the papers of paper above, and this happens more to children than to no one, and it greatly grieves their eyes, and they come with catharral effusions in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down upon their faces again, and sleep above, and are their papers below their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place at your breast and feel the exinach between.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then take one cloth made of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled inside the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moist area, not more than the size of the wound that you would make for a vine; and make the skin smooth as far as you see the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take then a whole piece of rough cloth between your knees at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and beware that you do not put anything in the slit, lest you bruise all the way to the eye, lest you bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly until it opens; then take it as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break and put on something to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is cleansed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms at the hot place, then apply poultices soothing them until they are cleansed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper grow, they become tangled with something other than their natural state, and are inflamed, which harms the eyes, and brings about manners of illnesses such as tearfulness and softening of the papers and opacity, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is the cure according to three ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicinal poultice according to what is written in this chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from oil to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into one thread above; and let this be on the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and guide one thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor's edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the tangled hairs, all the way to the great tear canal to the small; then pull out one thread, and put a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then sign on the paper a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see increasing the paper which is divided all around.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si à tel qui a mestier qu'on cope grant quantité de papier selon ce que le papier est mollifié; puis font à tout le spatiumile sus les II lignes que tu as signié, et commence des lois grand larmier jusque à petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poils naturels en la grossece d'un raïz, puis boute l'onceine en un des II angles du keur, puis l'écorche toute; puis assemble les II levres à une couture d'une aiguille à tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sang, et fais aérère la superfluité des fils sur les II sorcils à tout aucunes choses gluantes, si tu vues faire ce; et si ce non, si n'en aies cure, puis laisse la couture et les fils jusque à III jours ou IV; puis cure la plaie sans couture de choses sechantes et constrigant, car le papier se relève au soudement de la plaie et l'assemblage du lieu, mais la couture est muétre (si com dirent li ancien), et c'est ovraiges sans peur; et si à une autre manière: et est que tu signes la papier d'une figure qui soit ausi com le feuille de mirtre, si com nos avons conteit, à III onces déservées selonc la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Et se tu n'as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n'est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait un fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute l'autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lo second fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les fils igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus quoi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu'il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l'apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l'incision; mais li costure en l'une et en l'autre est plus artificialz.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the tear canal; and cut off at the two ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations into two parts form; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die, wither, and fall off, until it falls away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then he will be given some strength, and cure him until he is healed; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is raised, and they can no longer grow hair; and that is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the threads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and let it be under the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle into all the chase at the root of the tangled hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you draw it up to the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it comes forth all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from the pores above and you can see it by the vision of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin becomes smooth; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural beard, and lift it up with that one, so that it is stretched out and then lifted.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the pouring of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or the purtification comes to the eye, there are two ways in which it occurs: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treatment for it is that you cut open this wound, and separate its lips, and put linen tents inside, and tie it so that it becomes healthy; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	If you do that, then the illness will return worse than the first one; but it works with soothing things, like fenugreek; and rosewater or water of almonds cooked with flaxseed and oil of dragon's blood melted in some oil, and wrapped in a cloth, and that will cure it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to make sure it does not harden again in the same form as it was before; and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it may come back in the same form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is beneath, which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the manner of work is that you take a needle, which has a double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left armpit as far as the right, so that the threads come out in two cuts of the flesh. Then, make the flesh above to wrap around all the needle, and cut at the spatula's wide edge.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it is right; then good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or inside the paper; and be the keys of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle such that when they are assembled, the figure will be as if it were the figure of a letter whose name is "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges that has grown underneath, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a linen thread; then follow the cure of what we have said about medicines for soothing, and tents, until it be healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from gash or cut or burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the treatment in accordance with the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possibility that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is bound with white of egg, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a raser under the paper, lift it up; and let it be held by pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the thin spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp or bleeds the eye; and your incision, from which you remove that assembled part, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the whole assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye, salted water is used, and a sweet broth, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye damp wool in abundance of egg; and after three days use the vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the swelling of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the swelling is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard boil on the skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when one touches it with iron and cools it with pincers, it cannot be removed; and both of these appearances begin near the great eyelid, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then works the eyes; and lift up the paper with one hand, then coil the swelling with pincers of small doubleure, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the swelling, and pierce it to the entire needle, and tie the swelling with one thread and extend it above, and cut off at all the root of the hair that follows the prune and the silk to the hair just up to the head; then cut off what remains in the root of the eyelid to the entire thin spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that through incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes the swelling is tied only with an onyx stone, and a thread, as we have said; then one cuts off all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the fatty flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and make a broth with lard, and let it be until the next day; then perform the cure as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the swelling is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the onyches cannot enter, many times this appearance of swelling is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it growing, then work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly, a little bit sharp, according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the swelling above subtly, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a broth made of lard and red vinegar and boiled silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if it were a boil, then pour milk, and first cure the hot apostema until it is healed, then begin again the treatment as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin of the wound impedes sight by great harm, then suspend it with an onion, and cut out a part but not all, so that there may not be a flow of tears; then distill into the eye a red collyrium which is made from latakia.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows on the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people's wounds never once show red flesh, and cover the prunelet and restrain above the papers and turn them to the back, and seem like a rose made of balaste; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your sight, then you open the wounds, and coil all that flesh into suitable stitches for it, and sustain it with force; then cut off the first layer, and go cutting away with the razor until the end, and take care not to cut the eye during the operation; and be the incision as we have said in the incision of the ulcer and in small forces where one removes the scab, just like the shape after this chapter shows; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil from which you distill or draw forth redness and similar corrosive medicines, and put above the oil cotton with egg white, so that it is assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the without cover rises, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things; then return to your operation until it is healed, and thus make all flesh that has been stitched in the oil by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you speed up the cure of each weak eye in a natural way; and by accident, work with iron; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that these members are suffering from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Blood vessels are red veins that are covered on the eye and tolerate the eye's work and weaken the eye forever.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary for the first one to look at where the eye is, and if it is elsewhere, and there is no other disease except for the eye; then the coil is made in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head against yours, then suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and be the small vessels double according to this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two onions by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the forces of those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to harm the eye at all with the sputum, and do this operation at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is left of the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it stay some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of hot aposteme, then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the abscess of the eye.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor is called "arissati" abscess: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a sign in it that you must cut into the aposteme, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then return all the instruments of which there is this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to a new head, and be pointed like a file as in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with medicinal caustics.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is closed, and flesh grows back, and the body of the bowstring is closed, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemated, and bad things do not happen, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the point of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time by iron, and by hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take a force according to this form, and be the iron key at 3 angles, and the thread be thinned up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the bone below the jawbone, and move your hand away from the eye hole, then turn around to the forest as far as it can pierce the bone and the patient will feel it because the blood flows in if they hold their hand on their forehead; and then restore the place of dry medicines, just as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, the matter goes into the nostrils; so this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully opened and there is no blockage or constriction in the navel, nor diminishment, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply poultices or hirudines to suck without hurting, then place on the eye a bandage made of aloe, encens, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery enough, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it above a durable binding, and repeat the poultices to suck without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the bandage loosens, then it is necessary that you tighten it much; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, this is good; if not, then repeat the plastering and the drapery and the bandage and the poultices until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the rupture of the vitreous humor.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the vitreous humor, and it bursts forth like a grain of resin, and it is quite astonishing to see; then if you see it bursting forth, the operation is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below, just up to the surface above, and then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl as it is; then cut the place where the double thread is and tie one part of the vitreous humor around, and tighten it well, then extract the awl and apply a moist linen cloth to the eye with plenty of egg white; and let it be like that until the threads have chosen the vitreous humor, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes show great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula that comes near to the fontanelle of the eye, and drain the moisture, albogined, down into the eyes, and let it enter as soon.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bottom of the eye.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from when the pus gathers in the eye, resembling a clear liquid flowing down, and it's not a clear liquid; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take hold of their head with your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the pus rise above to your eyes; then it should be set and not descend and should be cleared of the light, and the patient should see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is a clear liquid, and if the pus is not prepared in the manner we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains,
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the eye.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have found the likenesses of waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit in your crossed hands, away from the light because of the sun, and their good eye should be tight and strained very strongly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right, the instrument which is called "almagda"; then put the point of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a finger in that corner of the eye at the part of the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" skillfully and turn your hand until it pierces into the corner of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the width which is from the prunele just up to the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the bone in that paper because of the brightness of the horned crown, then put the instrument just next to it or where the water is, then press down under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little, and if the water descends again, put force with the instrument, and when it is well seated and does not move, then extract the almagda easily by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into water just a little gemstone, and lift out from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by the way the eye stopped or moistened linen in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and bind with holy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our time, put on a common broth with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deep into it, but make it subtle, then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary for you to do this now in the work of the cure or after the incision, but rather hasten to do so, because the water is rising quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	se apostemes chaus vient, that boils come, and you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it at what soothes the boil; and when it is appeased, then loosen the eye and put on its face oriel for to cover any day, and be there in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then come out of the house slowly and slowly, and turn into one's case; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the land of Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almagda pierce, by which the water is drained, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are made of proper earth.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the ends of these are of the same subtlety, and the last one is in three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the night.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there arise or are born diverse worms joined together, because of which some appear like scorpions at many feet; and if there are such, then it has a worm enchanted with fiery color, and also a soft worm of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that soft worm which is not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the juice onto those worms, and treat them with fire; then take care that you can sustain at the subtle and sharp edge of a knife on one side, until you know that that worm is entirely destroyed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be cut off, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, until nothing is left; and if without bothering you, or an abscess arises, then apply the cauterize as needed; and if it's malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the wound is stopped and all the hairs are removed, then pour on the nose a mixture of oil and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusqu'à palais, saiches qu'il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu'il i a char nee en l'os desus, à quoi li estrumens ne vient mie pour taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes un fil de lin un peu gros, et soit noué de mains nous, et ait entre chaque nuit d'espace un doit ou moins; et mette le malade loin chef du fil en son nez à quelque puissance, et tire en odorant tant qu'il vienne par le nez dedans la bouche; et maintes fois font ainsi les enfants à l'école, et c'est légère chose à celui qui le veut faire; puis tient le chef qui vient par le nez à une main, et l'autre chef qui vient par la bouche à l'autre main, et sait l'un après l'autre en soignant à nous qui sommes au fil.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Leave the flesh as you know it has been corrupted by night, then take the child, wipe out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back again just like before; do this for 3 days or more, until all that remains of the flesh is consumed; and then put a cloth on the wound some days until it heals, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, through which one distills oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, semblant à une lampe ouverte, comme une caille, et le conduit aussi; et si tu voies, fais une caille close, et soient les estrumens pleins pour espurger le chef; et ait une mainche au chef pour le tenir quant on chaufre l'huile ou quelque liqueur.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the night.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there is on the head at night a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great in time, so much that it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut it off at the beginning, and remove all fat, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it off until it is great, take heed if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of gentle touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can be all cut off, then empty the patient and cut off the abscess without fear, and treat the wound with things soothing and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the night is cut off and washed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these joint works, it is of little profit, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is then necessary to do this with anyone who has one, if you look and see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together with a seam, and care for it until it heals; and if the lips are already detached on one side or the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their keratin until they heal, then assemble the two lips together with a seam, and bind it, and powder on top of powder blood of dragon, and broom incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster suitable, and leave it alone as long as it is healing itself, then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have inside their lips abscesses hard, resembling grains of mustard seeds, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and take out as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the incision with vinegar powder, until the blood is stopped; and then lift off the poultice easily, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is on the gums flesh accumulated, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut off at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the wound vinegar powder, or other drying and constricting powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it off again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scrapings; and sometimes the teeth are black and green and yellow, as far as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his teeth be in thy saint, and remove the teeth or the scrapings until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and the greyness, and the yellowness and the other discolorations, as long as they are removed; and if one takes away what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, one recommences to remove the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper with which we remove the teeth has different forms than he with which we remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as long as you can, for this must not be done; for it is a very high substance just up to the point where one has no excuse for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to vomit, you must be certain about the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	The patient suffers much from the pain, and thinks it is because of a toothache, and makes them vomit the good tooth; and yet the pain does not depart by this means, until the bad thing comes out, for we have already tried these remedies before; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, so it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in every direction with a sharp spatula to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it to your fingers or fine forceps at the first pock and pock, until it is well extracted, then secure the forceps; and have the patient's jaw between your knees, and hold them so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it inside from each side lightly, and move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it should be filled with cloths, there where the perforations are; and if it is strained slightly with forceps, that it does not break when straining; and one must work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and leave one part, and let the tooth regrow in the patient through the evil of the root, causing greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not act like ignorant surgeons who, through their haste and boldness, break the cartilage some times, and do not bring about what we have recounted; but sometimes bring great harm through the roots that remain or through the cartilage they break, as often happens to us; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the wound with vinegar or oil of sesame; and if blood comes forth, which often occurs, fill the wound with vitriol powder; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, with which one pulls out the teeth first, are those with long pointed tips and large handles, which do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of great strength so that they do not bend at all to the pulling, and be well tempered as iron, and be toothed so that they may hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	Of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root stays at the shoulder, it is necessary that you place a damp cotton poultice on the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the skin is softened, then I put in the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems like a horn of plenty; and are made inside just like a file, and that's its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out at all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is known as a palisade, by which this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the roots jump out because of this, it is good; if not, then help with all instruments, by which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two handles, it is thus the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in relation to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, it is thus the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is this instrument strong so that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and skilled masters find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the old did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases and one does not break anything or another bone, or if it can be done, then one seeks instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and is aided by gestures; and this is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be strong and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but one can hold and remove; and then restore the spot with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then reset all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural body shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth or file it: then draw a line; and if it is uneven with the tooth, then take this instrument which has this form, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copes are cut and cut in small pieces over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file like this is its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth piece by piece over several days gently, so that it does not move until it chooses; then smooth out the end to any rasp, and if the teeth are too sharp and hurt the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front is loose, or by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without spitting, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, but it doesn't work; then you must restrain them with a thread of gold, for silver sons turn green and perish, but gold never changes; and be the middle thread not too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligning, take the thread and put it double between two healthy teeth, then place the key between my teeth, if there are one or more, until you come to a sound tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and slowly, until it doesn't move anymore; and be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the ends of the thread to a pair of pincers, and assemble them, and reattach between two healthy teeth, so that it does not wound the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it slips or the threads break, use another thread to hold it in place; it will remain and serve thus for its whole time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and carefully, just as we have said; and do not intervene if you are not a wise and skilled person, and one time make the shape of an osseous dent from a whalebone, and put it at the location where there is a defect, and restrain it so that it does not escape, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the link of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	At no time is this bond that comes from under the tongue or nature, except in one's birth; or by accident of a healed wound; and the works are such that you work on the mouth of the patient, with his head in your healthy state, and lift up the tongue; then tie off the nervous ligament at the large one, until the tongue is freed from its dwelling place, and if there is stiffness or numbness, and this is due to a sudden wound, then put in an unguent and bind the ligament with a bandage; and be sure that the incision is not too deep in front, for the artery that is below; and when you have finished, lift up the head of rose water and vinegar, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent; and wrap the patient's mouth every night, so that the wounds cannot become inflamed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if there is a flow of blood that comes, then put it on the glassy surface and spread it; and if the blood flows, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then cure him with another treatment until he is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be of a foul color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, then throw away the unguent, and make a poultice with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one part to another; and if the blood flows at your work, then put on vitriol powder until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished all the treatment; then lift the tongue with oil and vinegar, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat apostemes
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No growths come within the throat called "godath", and they are properly called the two almond-shaped things; and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and dull color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the roots are thick, do not touch with iron, also because of the bleeding; but leave it until it is dry, and then you will part it, or it would break on its own; and if it is of white color and the roots are fine, have your instrument ready to cover, but look first if the abscess has calmed down and is appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his cheeks be smooth, and work the mouth and take the tongue between the hands, and press it below all the instrument, for that is the form; and it should be of silver or subtle lead just like sharp knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue all over this instrument, and you see the aposteme, if take hold of it and push it into the amandres, and train it upwards as much as you can; and do nothing with the cloths, then cut to the instrument, so that it is in the form, which seems like some force; and yet the top are curved, and one side another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or andaine:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, so that it is in the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be twisting on one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the amandres, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and gentle, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked grated apples, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it so long as it is sound; and sometimes other apostemes are born in the throat besides the two amandres, so cut them then like the two amandres equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense; and I had already completely closed off her throat so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed in such a state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two canals through the two nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Then I hastened, and inserted an onion into one nostril, then the abscess burst open, and it released a great deal of pus; then I reinserted the onion into the other nostril of the nose, and worked the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the onion into this abscess, and extracted a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing again, and filled up the space I had emptied out, until it became very large; then I incised and cauterized inside the throat: thus it ceased to grow further; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When swelling comes down to the eye, and it is swollen and long, so it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is under a lump and rounded, so it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the boil abscess is calmed, and it is subtle, so it is necessary to scrape it; and that which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, so it is necessary to avoid the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue onto the instrument that we have remembered before this; then insert the lancet into the eye, and remove it below, and scrape with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond natural limits; for if you cover more, you will harm the voice and speech; and after incision, use what we have said in the incision of two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being covered, then you should use cunning in the cauterization to dispel their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cauteration is gentle and smooth.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then presses their tongue to the instrument we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confides with a warm, living heat, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and while using this instrument, which has the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a beard or hair on their head, put the medicine in it as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and have the patient sit up straight on their side, so that the saliva and mucous flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the vein for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it numb and the medication's irritation is appeased; and if you see anything, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into the hollow cane above, until the cotton rises on the vein; and do this many times until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, start again, and after the cautery wash around the vein with a cloth dipped in cold water, and cure by gargling as long as it is sound.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take camphor and yarrow and origan and rue and chamomile and vervain and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it is of silver or of lead, and whether one of the keys is placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the duct, until the eye is desiccated; after which it often recommences, until the eye dries, and be sure that you do not do this at the beginning of the rising of the abscess hot, for many things happen there; and do not do this but at the declination of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cord and put a hen's quill inside it, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the quill of a hen does not let the vapor weigh on the mouth, and it is good care together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Maintes fois s'aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, or aucune chose;
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the top so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to harm, nor push the bone inside; and see that the patient inserts the instrument, for it is best if he knows what he is doing or if the thing is awkward; so he inserts it downwards, or pulls it far out of all the instruments equally, until it is far.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the snot from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for sweat, as I have said in the division, by the care of medicines; and when this does not benefit at all, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you to.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sweat, so treat it with all small incisions or with fine forceps that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not worth it, take a braided cord, and tie it around the patient's throat, then tie the cord to the bed or bedstead, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full pitcher of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and if the sweat feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we said, then subfume the patient with assafoetida at the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the ear; do this many times, for it will come out without resistance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has burning coals, and the pos be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole be the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the sweat; and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, you start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient thirst, and eat salty things and all, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that she comes forth by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which you treat the snot is this: when you can see it, it resembles curved forceps for inserting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has a lime-like roughness, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is itself similar, and due to it holding moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the loose joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if the abscesses are not to be pierced until the boil is mature according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard and do not die according to their fulfillment, just like those that are on joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come in joints, and one leaves it until it is full of pus around it, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes constriction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is on the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it is mature, then it will harm the principal member; or if it is on the foundation, and one pierces it as soon as it is dead; and it is not necessary that you pierce a hard abscess without digestion being completed, except for the one that is on the foundation, which cannot be drained deep, and will become fistula; and it will not heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is abated, and the departures of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and of swelling and inflammation of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it appears most dependent on the location of the abscess, and where it opens outward; and be the perforation long enough to reach into the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who are bent, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the right place, so it is worth doing that you let the puncture be done until it is confirmed in complete digestion as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you make the perforation before that, then the body will be opened by the venom from it, and will be full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and deepen the orifices.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the grandeur of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the skin, and cover; when it has become as worn out as a rag, and is exhausted, then it is necessary to do so as one does with babies: and if there are those that are split in three angles, and if there are those who are covered like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses of angels; and if there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil who have not a head, as aposteme soffre superficial, it is necessary that you pierce calmly; and it is necessary when the apostemes are great, and it has gathered great bowe, and you pierce, if you do not pull out all the bowe in that hour, but pull out part of it; then stop the aposteme just to the next day, then take nothing further from there; do this by degrees as many times as it is necessary until the bowe is gone; likewise if the patient has weak virtue, or women bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits are shaken some times with the issue of the bowe, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take care.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, proceed with this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your aposteme, if the wound appears, and look to see if the wound from the aposteme is small; and if it's a clean incision, then try to stuff it with linen or old cotton; and if it's a large abscess, and there are many pits, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so they come together against each other; and if you have cut into the aposteme some part of the skin, and you have covered it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or raw linen without moisture, and tie it just to the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, then mix cold water and vinegar, and wet the cloth moistly, and place it on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then mix government and care, and the powders that I have said to put in this book, and if it is in winter, and the boil or abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary to place tents and moist cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the boil is fleshy, then it is necessary to place moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the abscess and the pus and cure it, as is necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	It is necessary to know universally in treating abscesses: and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the boil on the head comes, it is small abscesses that come forth in the manner of threads, just as the yolk of an egg, and there are many similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It is of fat and such places where there is moisture also like pimples; and if there are such that are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the cutting is that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes afterward, whatever thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then dry it with the long cloth above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving anything of the peel which contains that moisture, for it comes back again if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply the dressing to the wound, and let it be until the next day; and those things will cure what is left from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then start the cotton again, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it does not linger at night; then care for the wound with an ointment as needed, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds no fat, cut it according to this form, from long; and then scrape away all its edges, and strip it of all parts, and put all your care in drawing out what is inside; and if the artery makes a contrary motion, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly, do with the abscess if it is pitted, and cutting and curing as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on top of the pitted abscess and the moist one, for it is lighter, since they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and among those I found an abscess on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess to be like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if anyone had done anything with it, they would have made as much a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come to the chief of children and to the roots of ears, let the opening be always at its most dependent place in order for the pus to issue forth; and let the cure be as it is fitting.
des scrophules	of scrofulae
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are very bad, and are entangled with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located within its own region, just like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar things to these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one you see with good disposition to touching, and it looks like the color of the body, and is not inflamed on either side nor does it affect the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and it is not deep; then it is necessary to incise it above, and scrape off each part, and if you need to use the two lips of the cure, do so as we have said in abscesses of the head; and go little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it necessary to leave a gap too wide, lest your hand escape, and see too far ahead, lest you cut something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stop bleeding, and apply the wound; and leave it so until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding has stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; and then examine whether there remain any small pustules, if so, cut them open and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the abscess has a large vein in its root, then it is not necessary to cut open that abscess at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it drop down without harm; then fill the wound with old Egyptian cotton dipped in oil, and then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover the entire scrophula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, then there will be no remaining superfluity because of the greatness of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and pull tight, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophulas that retain superfluity, burst forth there where it appears to open up; and the bursting is done in the same way as the one previously mentioned, by pulling tight, then administering tentations with ointment and similar things, so that what remains of corruption corrupts; and when the wound is well purged, administer ointment allowing the flesh to be healed, until it is sound.
de squinance	of swelling
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have swelling, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not make use of these things for this reason, because all the veins and the plexus of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the plexus, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it under three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision made by syphilis, not in the cartilage; and those who know how to do this are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, so it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its length, then cuts the leather until it comes to the nape; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then closes the abscess, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein at the nape which sprouts forth through the broken joint and through the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew it all up without cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	I also said that one should not do this just until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the fault is about to fail.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglote because the patient cannot swallow, and it breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the illness of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young woman take a knife, and she thrust it into her throat, and cut out part of the channels of the womb; and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided the flow except for the throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healed; and nothing befell the young woman except that she lost her voice, and returned to her normal state; therefore I say that in cutting open the epiglottis there is no need to fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess of a greenish color, and it occurs frequently in women; and there are two kinds: natural, and accidental; or if it is natural, it has no trickery.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is of two kinds, one which resembles fatty tumors, and another kind which is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be worked on without great care in someone who is small, and prove and search all around: if you find it like a fatty tumor, and cannot be reduced by any means, then cut it out, just as one cuts out a fatty tumor, and treat it to the very end, if there is no harm; and search thoroughly, and cure it as needed, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of the flesh.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are ours, of which I will say all similarities; and now it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between exit and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that pus is warm and feverish, holding on until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the exit there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains its own sac, which is its proper pouch and is in accordance with the color of the body; and it begins like a kernel, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, either fat or moist, and very much in color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments that are called "intimate", according to what its form will be or according to the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses from us is that you take or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two pokes and pokes until you know that the instruments have pierced the core; then withdraw the inserted instrument, and be careful not to let it burst forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moistness comes forth from the core, regardless of its color, do it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes, know that it is fat, so then cut it in crosswise, and take it with pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part and follow the direction where you are leading it to come out safe with the needle; and if you cannot lead it out safely, then lead it by pieces such that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, then the wound returns many times; and if there is only a little left, and the blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold it in place, and put on things that are hot and soothing for the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the wound is great, then cut off both lips of the wound, and cure it by dealing with what remains.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or another thing is contrary, or if you are in a hurry and apply the liquid of vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound has purged, and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the flesh.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here is the translation:
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of tumors are many and similar, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and if there are tumors that have two shapes in three manners; and if there are tumors that have three shapes and are in three manners; and if there are tumors that have two shapes and one shape only, and are in three manners; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharpened, and there are some that do not cut much more than from one side, which causes us to scrape the nerves, so that one does not cut the vein or nerve; and among these interfering things are those repulsive responses in fingers, so that the patient is unaware of the opening of abscesses; and they come in three manners: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one only uses them moderately in certain places, such as joints, arms, breasts, and hips, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scraper for flutes, according to this form, by which blood is staunched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes in the place that heals by cutting open veins and arteries, and sometimes retorted according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Breast milk of some men swells when they begin to be corrupted, as much as it seems like female breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must know how to proceed according to this form up to 2.g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine inserting a piece of char, then assemble the two lips of the wound at the seam, and care for it until it is healed; and if the breast milk drips down below and is wasted because of its largeness as in women, then cut it into two grooves above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from .b. up to .g.; then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about seam and powders, and what is necessary in the care, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the dripping of blood, then you should fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive oil; and leave it so that it melts away the remaining fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	This abscess that comes from under the armpit is a type of hard scrofula or if it has nodules, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is blocked, and the skin is adhered to what's above, it often happens that abscesses form; and it also happens with a vein being emptied and abscessing; and if one knows this when it's due to the artery, then the abscess is long and deep by nature; and when you sense it in your hands, then you feel it as tautness; and when it's due to the vein, then there appears to be a reason for fleeing; and it's foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it's under the armpits and shoulders and neck and at many other places, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to avoid the fire treatment, and he who is at the head should also avoid it, and in that person who has a blockage of an artery beneath the skin; then work on cutting the edges, and depart nicely from the arteries so that they are uncovered; then push under one an awl, and make it pierce up to the other side, and stop the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then point the place between the two ties with an introducer until the blood that is there flows out, and be freed from the abscess; then apply the treatment for swelling as it occurs, until the ligature falls; then treat those things as ointment applies to them, until they are healed; and if the abscess is due to the vein being cut, you should tie with your hand what you can of the abscess all over the skin, then push under the awl at the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie with one of the two parts at the two knees of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads will not come out, rebolt another awl along all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and stop the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until the superfluous fluids flow out, then cut the superfluity of the flesh and leave what is bound; then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments for tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein when they are hardened or due to excessive effort, or similar things, so too do abscesses come at the nails when they are worn out or due to great labor, and similar causes.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, and that happens most often in the shoulders and arms and everywhere where there are joints, it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one constrains it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely deep within the body, but rather below the skin; and it swells equally on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor downward or upward, and he who has a joint will not consent to be opened by iron: perhaps there would be contraction; and he who has one in the head or forehead, makes the skin of the scull thick.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, one holds it with pincers and cuts at its root; and if it is large, one suspends it with an awl, and excises, then removes and sews together the wound to the seam, and cures it as long as it is sound.
des grosses boces pendans	of great swellings hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul,
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work of incision is such that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthralgia is white and moist and of subtle root; so I cut at the spatula wide, and the cautery by fire is in my presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the cutting comes often too great hemorrhaging of blood, and if it flows forth, then you must hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient trembling and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind the arthralgia as we have said, and let it be for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the linen thread until it cuts the arthralgia, and make sure to work by it without sense; and if the roots are large, then you should fear to cut it yourself because of the belly, but you can well cut half, then cauterize so that it does not relapse; then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the thalamus which is of a flux color and poor sense and full of milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	Se the appearance of the belly comes from cautery of wound or incision of syphilitic sore, and it is above the stomach and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other swellings, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness; and if this is from the routure of syphilitic sore and by the issue of belly, then the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and apparent by diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its mouth it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes bound, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and apparent when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is because of blood, then it appears by these signs: the aposteme is large and hard, and fixed according to a quantity; and if it is because of windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave it alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you command the patient to straighten his body and be stretched out straight, then sign around the edge of the swelling; then command him to lie down quietly between your hands, and go around the area where you have signed to the entire perimeter, then cut off half of the abscess above the great ligament; then tie it with a strong thread or a cord made from strong silk firmly, and let the tension be equalized; then open the half of the abscess that is stretched out on the thread, and put your index finger inside, and feel the intestine; if you find it caught by the thread, release it, and push the intestine back into the belly; and if you find the bowel, take hold of it with the ligament, and remove any superfluity; and if the artery or vein gives resistance, go gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two fine threads on them, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as you would pierce it; then stretch the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see something, remove the needles, and leave the area until it can be operated on, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; or cut when it has become subtle and can be done, then treat the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as it requires, and bind the wound.
dou chancre	of the chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division, the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; and we say that chancre breaks out in the armpits, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancient ones said that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed like the chancre that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one should completely remove it when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it, nor has anyone been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with some black bile; then make him well if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient for the operation; then give your hooks or chancre to the boil, and cover it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow completely, and inspect the wound carefully with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is contrary to you, then cauterize it so that the blood stops flowing; then treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division that there are likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it is simply said; and one should not touch iron on these two likenesses: it's to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is deadly things; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclytes" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease that is not dropsy, such as turmoil of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and the attendants press the belly from behind by pushing water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spatula-shaped spoon according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And be inserted to a point, and yet not so deep that it can come up to the intestine when you insert it, and not hurt it; then see if dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if it is, you must cut inwards from above downwards three fingers' breadth from below; and if it is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers' breadth; and if it is due to urine, it should be on the right side, and do not let the patient lie over the incision lest the superfluities run down to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and stop it, and lift your hand up to the spatulate part between the skin and the sac as when cutting to the quantity of an fingernail or about; then pierce the sac until the spatulate part comes to its normal position, and that is the sign of water, then treat it further, and insert this instrument thus.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a subtle silver chain, and it is of red earth or light-colored stone, and in the part below, I, a small perforation; and on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the key is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut with a pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, in such a way that when the instruments come to water, they now descend on the instrument; empty it then by one-third or two-thirds part, for if you drain more than what is needed at that hour, there is danger that the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they become faint, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of their virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulses; then take the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the key that stops the perforation which is on the syphilis, as I have spoken, in such a way that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering thus, and drain off a small quantity of water; do this each day, and keep from flowing until only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Et se tu doutes sur le malaide, et tu laisse beaucoup d'eau, alors il cure de la sépulture ou sablon chaud, et par mouillage ou bain et au soleil, et s'il se tient de boire; et le cures des médicines déshydratantes tant qu'il soit sain, et cauterise sur l'estomac et sur le foie et sur l'épine après l'extraction d'eau, si comme j'ai dit avant.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Some children are born with a hernia in the penis, or the hernia is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary soon that he does not pierce at all the subtleties of the body according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put the hernia in a cloth, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, then remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance there is no harm, because the urine that comes forth does not leave the cloth closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	That which belongs to he who has a small abscess is treated with powdered hornbeam, as we have said, if it will spread.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the abscess in its place are afflicted, because none are born with an abscess at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis high; and they cannot menstruate because the matter cannot reach the uterus, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to do this is that the patient lies on his back, then lifts up the head of the penis and cuts it off like a pen nib, so that the pit opens in the middle as it should; and take care not to let blood come out which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, cut them off and clean all, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, having a foul smell and a bad color, then you should apply a cauterization to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it open, and if the abscess is on the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the inside part first; and when it is closed, then treat the outside part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you treat it together, if the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and a blackness and corruption come to its head and in its foreskin; then it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then pour on an ointment made from the rind of ripe pomegranates and dates, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then administer the lunar cautery in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries are of two dispositions together: that is to say, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you tie or bind the penis with a linen cloth, and have the patient urinate through it; and when the hairs at the head of the penis, which have not been circumcised, become inflamed due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape them away with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis be freed from all parts; and if this is a difficult thing to do, then it is necessary that you scrape it off at the spatula-like instrument at the head of the penis and skin; then wash it gently between the two, and put a thin damp linen cloth in cold water, so as not to inflame again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; although when we do this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient people did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one inch, with great force, and with all a new instrument; so it was done when there were two skins, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound recovers, and there is double pain, and the purification of the skin around the inch is not secure at the tip of the member; and the purification of the ulcer by chance escapes the iron, and the work corrupts, and many times it happens thus that they do not need purification and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with force to all the thread of the bond I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you press your hand, if it is equal in all the tendons; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and be the manner of the first work such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are not making him do anything other than bind the thread around the penis as much as possible, and then allow it to relax in every way you can; then make it rest between your hands straight, and replenish its strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or whistle, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then clean it well of the ordure that has gathered there, then bind the signet with a double thread, then tie below one link to another link; and hold it by the two thumbs through the second loop in the pouch and on the index finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the whisker above quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for this is the matter; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a drapeau glued with an egg yolk cooked with rose water, mixed with good rosiness oil and fresh oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for purification is this: the two heads are held and cut, and they are equally great as the hands.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification is when the knife bleeds inside the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the lump makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it takes three days, and that which is below the penis is swollen, then let it be so until the abscess is appeased, and lightly scrape off; then cut it as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, for nothing will harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb with sudden wound powder, which we have said to treat about powders, and if you cut too much with the knife, and it goes above, then it will not harm; then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Li retenue of the urine is due to a blockage by stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released and you see the retention is caused by the stone which is lodged at the junction or neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch out his belly from above down to the back, and strain the patient's anus as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder will be constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary for you to administer an extraction using all the instruments which are called "siringue", whose form is: and it should be made of subtle silver hair, like a bird's feather; and it should be about one and a half palms long, and it should be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of issuing urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the superfluity of the thread and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on the siege, and lift the bladder and penis with moist olive oil and dry water; then put the syringe lightly into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the mouth; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel come close to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conductor or guide is twisted; then leave the thread with all the wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine run; and begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see it distilled in water and medicine, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	Elle est close, and if it has three holes: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the lead hairs comb out because the medicine is such that it stops the flow well without addition, so one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see fit to put your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the key in the moisture, and pull along with the pulling force that is there; then pull the moisture into the key, and afterwards push hard on the pulling force within; then the moistures will go inside, and come out now at the bladder, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the subtle form of clysterization by which one clisters the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of archaught, and the key is higher up; and below it is one breast where the cord lies; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see used to clysterize the bladder, then tie between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot containing that moisture over the fire; then push the head of the clyster into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has come out, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then push the thread strongly through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dale, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie in the instrument; and do so with your hand pressing until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is engendered by rains, and all signs, and which stone one should work on with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often in children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears as hair, and makes the patient's penis hurt, and makes him pee many times, and then becomes inflamed; and often the foundations are broken; and is lighter the healing of children until they have four years, and is much more grievous in old men, and is for those who are middle-aged, between youth and old age; and is the cure easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by laxative, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and throw him backwards and move him down below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes slide out from above; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declivitous downwards; then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in position, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't yield to touching at all, moisten your two fingers with oil from the left hand, if the patient is feeble, or with your two middle fingers, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it at your fingers, and push it out further along where you see that you are going to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the stones, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the stones in the part where one makes the incision; then he should insert the spatula carefully, so that this is the shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And be between that which is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left snowbank; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your feet should be at the fundament, and let the size of the traverse be such that it be wide behind and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great; by chance the pressure is such on the foot which is at the fundament that it jumps freely without labor; and know that there are some stones where there are angles and margins: it is hard to get out; and there are some that are soft, resembling a scab, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And then where there are angles and margins, make the size greater; and if it doesn't jump, you must stretch upon the forceps which are also like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you can put below the instrument a subtle curved instrument; and if you cannot manage it thus, then open up the perforation, and if the flesh is stripped, then constrict it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stones, then bore first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then make way forward, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be cut out, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately, so that the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless you should try to remove it, or to break off with pincers as much as you can, until you have removed it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and put a moist cloth on top, either in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool down the hot aposteme; then turn the patient over onto his back, and do not release the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then arise very well the wound's appearance in oil and water; then treat the patient with diaphanicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot apostemes come into the wound and ulcers, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it causes urine retention, which is known in this way that without a sound with the urine: then pour your drink into the wound, and draw out that blood, because if there remains, it will corrode the bladder and destroy it; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and sea salt, and help him in all ways you can, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, you bind his two buttocks together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethral conduit of the penis and stuck inside and the urine cannot come out; then follow what I say, cut many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have proof like that.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come further into the bladder; then insert the probe lightly into the penis until you reach the stone; and turn the probe to your hand in small strokes on the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it will be broken and jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders, tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the penis point to the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is sound.
de la piere des femmes	of stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that stone is lodged in women, and if it does happen, it is a grievous cure, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will uncover herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, so it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cunny, there where the appearance becomes apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her womb above or below, and let the first piece be small; then pour the water into the piece, if you sense the stone so far from the wound that the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: to wit, small and great and rough and soft, long and rounded, and those with holes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses in order to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood overflows, put a vitriol poultice on the spot, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is staunched; then return to your work, as long as the stone is being extracted, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work. And if the blood overflows, and this is due to the artery which has been cut, put powder on the spot and strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again, but leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is assuaged and the wounds have settled, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramace aquouse is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or white sac, which is below the skin of the scrotum that contains the testicle; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the testicle, if one thinks it is another testicle; and it's the skin of the scrotum between the white sac that we have said; and these things only happen when there is no other cause.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this ramace is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it happens when percussion comes on the groin, and this moisture has many colors: or it's a color declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or aquous white, and this happens often; and these are signs to know this gathering, for if it is in white scab that we have said, then the abscesses return, I can see so long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the groin, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture on the proper cloth, then the abscesses return with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white scab, one feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding quadrature, that is, the shape as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the examination, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when we treat it with iron, so it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then place him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit at the right, and extend the rod to one of the two grooves of the kidneys; then take the spatula lying nearby, and scrape the skin of the kidneys among themselves up to the length until it reaches the finger joint, and make sure the cut is straight, removing the skin of the kidneys just enough so that it becomes white, and flay subtly according to our power; then pierce the white part plain with water at a large hole, and extract all the water, and then place the stitches, and raise the skin above; and do not touch the kidneys but only the skin; scrape everything or in pieces similarly the edge of it subtle, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return; and if the yolk jumps forward to your work, then set it back in its place when you have completed the work of the skin; then assemble the two flaps of the skin of the kidneys with a seam, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	and if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decoration of blood; then cut the scrotum to all the suspended parts, and extract the testicle, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound a linen cloth moistened with rose oil; and put on another linen cloth moistened with wine and oil, and put above the two cushions, and above double cloths, and tie it all around the bandage that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and put them in torn linen according to this shape, and have them sewn together in the girdle of the trousers, and one of the corners takes up on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the pointy part; and the other corner takes up on top of the two shoulders, and is entirely gathered into the knot of the belt; and sometimes this branch of cautery is used in place of iron surgery, and that you take a cultellate subtil cautery, and cut the skin of the shoulders, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scab that contains the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that scab with fine points, and scrape it off with this hot subtlety.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And make the blow in all ways that you can, until you reach everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and carefully guard against bleeding and carefully manage the works of surgery; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess or bleeding or another thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this operation due to its horror, so administer a perforation, as I told you, and know that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the abscess is located, then place the patient on a light siege; then pierce the abscess in the part below the whole spatula-like surface, and insert the perforation into the length of the body; and let the holes be wide so that all the water can flow freely; then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and allow the remaining water to run out, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow water to exit from the mouth of the wound, so it is necessary for you to insert a pin or instrument that treats the water of those with dropsy, as was described before; and enlarge the pock of the wound, and know that the water will return, and be assembled after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this sinew there are many fears and dispositions, for which it seems to me that much is lost if one leaves it; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is due to many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known by excessive sourness and ague, which spreads to the joins, or through percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and it finds no pain, and the abscess is grievous; and by chance some grievous abscesses are painful and stony, and of foul color, and sometimes comes from a hardening of an artery, or an inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to a hardening of an artery, then it is known by the warm appearance of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Whoever is made of a swelling from a vein is known by their disposition to the expression of touching the shoulders, and can do well in cutting according to this likeness, and on other limbs; and it's that you cut out the key of the kidneys, then let the egg rise high, and treat the white syrup of the bladder, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already sewn with these characters, then it's necessary that you treat the egg and the key; and if it's airy in the syrup or in what is within the vessels, then it's necessary that you deliver all that tension and cut the key again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch of grapes, with the softening of the kidneys, and the patient becomes very grievous when he walks; and the cure for this disease is just as frightening as that one before, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;
de la routure dou syfac	of the route of the scarabaeus beetle shell
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, which makes sudden pain come to the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of apostemes under the skin near, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the end of the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines come down with the intestine, and are retained there, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures one should beware, because of this one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Et the manner of work is that you instruct the patient to place his intestine in his hand within the wound, if he can reach it; then be sovined on his neck between your hands, and lift the belly; then set the cure above, and cut all the skin off the coccyx long; then put inside the leathers of the size uncured according to what you need to open the wound, and make it such that the breath can issue; then scrape away the sacrum that is below the skin of the scrotum, until the white sacrum is uncovered from all sides; then put your two fingers in that which instructs the scrotum, between the white sacrum which is below the skin of the egg, and between the second sacrum, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second sacrum; and then move to the right hand within the cure of the scrotum, and set the white sacrum high on your left hand, and lift the egg to all the sacrum towards the size; and instruct the minister to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen what is behind the tie; and examine with your two fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped or covered by the white sacrum, and if you find anything, then put it into the belly below; then take a needle where there are ten threads, and put it in the back part of the sacrum, which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the size, then cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the sacrum, which we have said is below the skin of the scrotum, with a strong tie of two parts; then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them together with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an aposteme should come to harm; and put the tie above according to the first long tie of that one, and after these two ties leave the sacrum which is below the skin of the scrotum the size of a finger; and then cut in the part that is below the skin of the scrotum, until the breath corrects, and the bowels, as we have said before; then apply moistened wool to oil, and put it into wounds, and apply the tie that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white abscess core that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood decoration.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Because this happens often, and let the bandage remain until it is well for him; and if it delays falling asleep, then rise up with hot water and apply what we have said, until it falls asleep; then treat the wound with another treatment, until he is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this vein I never saw anyone who dared to perform the iron cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made in the same way as the fig which surrounds the gall bladder, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and lightly below; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of those who labor, until the vessels fall; and cure him as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a growth comes out in the groin, as we have said, and opens up the skin; and none of the intestines come down to the testicles, and if any do, it is little and repairs itself every hour; and yet if it stays too long in this state, the wound or syphac grows, until the intestine comes down; and this happens through the extension of the syphac which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen the skin and opens up; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and sometimes the cure is done with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the growth according to the size of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is beneath the skin that follows; then take the thread and place it on the visible part of the syphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two visible parts of the syphac above the thread, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut the syphac or extend any other thing, as I have made known in the cure of the fig of the intestines; then cure him with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you dress the wounds, so mend and heal the sore, until it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more helpful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the contents inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when one wants to treat it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts off the soft skin on top of the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess skin from the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and cure it just like other wounds, until it is completely healed, and the thread bleeds.
dou chastrement	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and because it would please me not to speak of it in this book; and there is no need for it except for two reasons: one is that the physician will respond in knowledge when asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often have need of chastising certain beasts to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the bowels are softened and relaxed; then we take them up in our hand, until they are restored and you feel them no more.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: instruct yourself to castrate the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut on each testicle once you have thoroughly skinned them; and leave no small piece or subtle piece that is above the vassels; and this manner of castration is more effective than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction some part of the testicles remains, by which the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafordie is according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles appears as well as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes in court it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the finger as well as a member and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Et the cure of the man and woman is that you bind together all the wounds, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the tenia
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tumescence is a wound bound together on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you bind the excess of tumescence to your hand or fingernails, and tie it lightly; and do not go too deep in piercing, lest blood flowing forth come to be, then another treatment follows until they are healed; and at another wound that arises at the mouth of the womb, and swells, and by chance bursts forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cover it, as we have said, with a poultice, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of the hare
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if the opening is small; and it occurs by birth or accident caused by disease that has occurred; or it is made in a subtle or sharp manner, and it happens in front, sides, below, or wherever; and prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly having flowers, and knowledge of this is gained through the gaze of a wise woman.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close by, it tends to occur in the breast or at the side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle suffumigation, and it appears close to the kidneys, then hurry, and do this: put both your hands on top of each other, and have the woman sit on her back, stretching out her legs; then press the two kidneys firmly until the subtle suffumigation has stopped, and be careful not to make a lump; then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie down at home each day, so that she cannot join together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the abscess is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh-born origin, then suspend it with a ligature and cut it; and have medicines that stay blood, such as aconite, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with many eggs; then administer a cloth made from pounded flax, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus let it be long, and afterwards administer a linen tent; then take care of other cures until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the margin comes flesh-born origin, then it is necessary to cut according to this manner, unless it is enchanted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enchanted abscess that is in the margin, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroids are openings of veins that without surgery become accustomed, and when emorroids are old they turn into varicose; and we have said in the division similar things about them, and their signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deep within the rectum, and they do not perceive sensation, except by means of iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the entrance of the rectum, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then take out the piles with pincers, and cut them at their roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as aloe and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply it as a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it sets, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him sit with poultices on his back and breasts that should not be hurt; then take linen, soak it in juice of plantain or of elderberry with old wine, and place it at the spot.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is settled, then care for the joint with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, so it should be covered as I said before with the balsam; and then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of abscesses of the uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come from the mother, such as chancre and stone-like abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes to the marriage bed, which is not one of the abscesses that coagulate; and if you wish to know the operation of iron, then look at whether the abscess is sluggish in its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the pain subside as much as possible; and then make the patient sit on a siege, and have two small sieges for them to lean on, and support their back and assemble their feet away from the leg; and be their thighs spread, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then place the instrument towards the right side, and administer it so that what enters the instrument comes no deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marris with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause harm; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess opens, and one prepares it with a gentle touch, then it is necessary to cover it with a cloth at the head, at the spatulate part; and when the bowstring is empty, then it is necessary that you put moistened tents in olive oil or green oil into the wound; and place the tent further away from the wound on the bottom of the mare and above the pinioned linen cloth, netted and moistened in water or boiled in mulberry leaves; then cure afterwards two days after anointing according to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the mare and the wound by a rinse with water and honey, and then with water or cooked roots of lily and aristolochia longa; then return to the anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the mare, then it is necessary that you take care not to cook with iron, but rather heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, and she knows the signs when thou seest the woman hasten downward, and desire to deliver her child; then hastens forth the child with great force; then know that this childbirth is according to natural form, and the issue below its head, and the secondine with it; and when thou seest these signs, then it behooves thee to press gently upon her belly, so that the child may come forth soon; for when it descends above its head, then the secondine accompanies it, and the marris of superfluities are cleansed by good purification; and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens sometimes above her feet, and comes forth from the body or from the head, or from the hands; or it comes forth from her stomach, or else; and sometimes it is converted by chance upon her neck, and by other bad signs; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deceit; and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out above its head in natural issue, and the woman labors grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have women hold her; and mix her nature with oil or fenugreek, and then give the midwife to drink between her breasts the little spatula-shaped mixture whose form is this:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	et fende la secondine, and cut the afterbirth, and scrape with one's fingernails until the moistors that are in it are forced; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil; then let her be pressed and strained again, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: so now the child will follow.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out too far, then you must gently reinsert them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then set down the stool on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not stumble; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the scalpel that was placed beforehand, and extract the infant, and reinsert it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the exit of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out of its feet, then it should be pushed up high; and then he turns it little by little, until it is even; then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump just up to the groin, if it is commanded to stretch and make the skin bulge with condiments; if it jumps too far, may God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it piece by piece until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily so.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take mustard of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the natural state of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in cold water up to just below the ribs; and when she is moistened underneath, then give her a mirror's color, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the stool, then make her protrude and strain her mouth and nose, and gently grasp her belly, for now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child between its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, it puts its hands up and down little by little; then sit down on its back, and let its legs hang down below, and be lying on the bed; and fold its hands up and down little by little, and then grasp its hands on the belly, and take away the pillows underneath, so that it is arranged downwards; and if the child does not cry out, then take its feet and shape them properly, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in; and rock the child up and down; and instruct the woman to hold it as long as the child comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the issue of the child which comes forth with one arm hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer a way to return the hand: if one cannot be returned, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and stretch out her legs properly; then administer the poultice that I have described; and if she does not miscarry, then make her sit on a stool, then study how to return the hand; and nurse the child according to its natural shape, and make it swallow, and instruct her to hold it as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; and when it is equal, so put on the natural muscular power of oil and aloe, as we have said, then command that it move poco by poco; and when you have done this, make it sit on the siege, and command that it take hold; and make it stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for all the secondine, so cut the secondine at your fingernail, until the moistors are emptied; and if the infant falls on its face and neck, then cut from the forehead, that it not be held back, and kill the infant; then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as is fitting, and command the woman to take hold sometimes: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live anymore if they be named; I know them well, that they multiply and are separated by the yolk which divides them, which is linked to the belly; and sometimes they come out as naturally as all others under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out easily, then the treatment is as we have said, and be subtle in movement, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do so that it moves towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the uterus I, II, III, IV, V, VI, or VII, or more up to XV, and are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of wise glory, and it is necessary that the doctor knows everything, because similar things happen by chance; so do as it is needed.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman after the stillborn child or in childbirth, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to manual labor; so know if the woman is of good health, and has no accident or she fears death; so know that the woman should be supine on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister gives her a poultice of two parts, or it is tied to the bed so that she is not troubled by the descent of the child; then smear the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with musk-mallow, althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and poultices; then put them in the mother's lighter, then choose the place where she puts the pessaries that are suitable for this, and take care if the child is prepared to descend on its head; so fix the pessaries in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or beneath her beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, then fix or prick and make smooth edges; and it is necessary that you hold the pessary in your right hand, and put a pad between the two hands of your left hand, and tie it all around your hand lightly, and fix the pessary in one of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then fasten it against the other bone, or the third if you have need of it, so that the extractions are even; and then stretch equally in moving from one side to the other, for the bones to issue forth, and the bones be dentated to hold them, as is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, then anoint the ball with some of its own oil and pour it into that part, and draw out the other part; and if nothing remains, then set this bone or higher up, and do so until everything comes forth.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by constraint, then you must wrap a cloth around it, until everything comes out; then cut at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you should do in the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fue et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fue; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	Et si il est éstrois au ventre ou au pis, si convient que tu le estraines à l'enveloppeit sus la main; et fend le ventre ou le pis, tant que les moistors qui i est corrent; et s'il autre membre sont ostoient, et le chiez demeure, si bouche la bail sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusque à la bouche de la marris; puis il boute l'once ou deux, et le traie four; et si la bouche de la marris est retrécie pour apostème chaud qui i est venu, si n'i convient mie travailler, ains convient aménistrer choses moistes et grasses; et l'aménistre emplaustres, et siéce en eau molleifiants et amoistans.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side and you can put him straight, then amputate what we have said in a living child; and if not possible, then treat it by parts and leave nothing of the second degree.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the patient brings what we have said about abscesses into the marriage bed; and if bloody discharge comes, it should be washed in cold water, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had borne a stillborn child, then she consulted another one on top of that, and rejected the stillbirth of the other one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and began great trouble.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a stillborn child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I sought the wound, and in treating the bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived long in this way, and occasionally would have a small bowel movement from below; and I remember this chapter only because, when the master finds an unusual thing, he knows how to intervene.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	of returning the joints to their place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the prescriptor, in which we write books; and to two returns for two joints of two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Moreover, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be one and a half palms wide, and the edge of the trees should be one palm long; and between the two hinges there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to both ends, about half a palm or slightly longer; and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marriage bed to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made more subtle and light in its resemblance to pincers; it shall be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tenaille; and let it have two handles, just as you see, one palm long and two inches wide. And when you view opening the mouth entirely with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on it, her feet pendant and legs spread out, then insert the two handles together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have made tenaille equal, according to the quantity that you view opening the mouth of the marris, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and have multiple forms; and when the surgeons have prepared them, the work is done more quickly and the height of men increases according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then have her exhale gradually, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she bursts forth because of this, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, I take the pot, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calament, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then I put a string or hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and tie it so that the vapors come inside the womb; then let it be done, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine starts quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not completely recovered, instruct the woman to soak her left hand in sesame oil or muscillaige of althea, and then let it return to its natural state, and wait for the second stage; and when she has found it, take hold of it and extend it slowly and correctly so that the womb does not resist the extraction; but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull; and thus it will come out and be delivered.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Et if the mouth of the marsh is very narrow, we have said the cure of draining, and fumigation with herbs; and if it is none of what we have said, then take care not to do foolishly; but what is in the mouth of the marsh, you must tie to the woman's hip, then cleanse her with a four-drug ointment clister; she will purge and recover, and come forth well; but all the same, when she purges so, it comes to bad odor in the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary to do fumigations that are suitable for this: no ancient has proved the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like seeing a resemblance to a chain, and one puts the head in its natural state, and wide stones on fire; and let there be fumigations above coals, and the lice until they are eaten away, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without the foundation being pierced, but it is stopped by a small syphac: therefore, at the bath, one must pierce that syphac to its right, and not let it be pierced with spatula-like instrument, and guard the bond so it does not touch; then put on a wet linen cloth in wine and oil, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a perforation of cloth in the wound, and let it stay for several days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And whenever this stopping of wound or abscess comes, it is necessary to cover that stopping: if it is a wound, then be cured as we have said with the cloth of wool.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules which come from below the fundament are nodation, and grow bigger than those which come from above the fundament to disappear, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is old, it works, and brings forth moisture, whitish or subtle blood, and sometimes these fistulas perish; and are known by this, that they either ooze or eject or blow wind when the patient does a bowel movement, and by chance, it jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to half of the penis; and they reach just to the jointure of the thigh, and just to nothing of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows that the fistula is persisting at the fundament, and not persisting; and it is that you put your thumb on the index or fundament, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twistiness, then I put a thin cloth or the hair of a horse into the fistula, as far as you feel the cloth or hair with your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there is no exit through pertus egestion or wind or voice, just as we have said: know that it does not pierce; and if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pushed through to the bladder or to the urethral passage of urine, and the urine leaps forth, and cannot be sewn together by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just to the jointure of the crotch, then the tendons come just to the place; if there is no curvature and the invention of pain around, then it stays just so, and there is no remedy nor salve by anointing; and in these fistulas Persians have not a cure stronger than labor, and vanity of foolish mirrors that intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not Persian and is not ancient, there is hope of health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his crotch, and have his crotch inclined towards his belly; then put a tent of earth or a plank if there is curvature, until you know when the tendons come.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you should put your two fingers there, if it senses then that the tendon has been pierced; and be discovered where you feel between your thumb the spleen or flesh, then know that she is Persian; if one does not work at all, then one cannot heal her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can heal some, but it happens rarely; and the aid that one does there, if it is a subtle cautery as described above, by applying heat to the fistula until it reaches the foundation; and do this two or three times until you know that these burnt parts are charred, which are like a bird's feather; and then cure with moist tents in butter, until those charred parts fall away, then anoint with oil greasing and soothing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that is not otherwise possible to be healed; and if the tent intervenes, and does not pierce all the way to the foundation which is at the bottom, and there is a thick covering of char or pus between your finger and the tent; and you see the fistula at the edge of the covering from the heat; then cut off from the beginning of the fistula, and insert it ahead of the tent, and apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be freed, and fall away; then remove those burnt parts that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the fire cautery assembles two things: it's to know, the burning of joined bones, and the drying of blood and the purging of moisture; then the care of moist tents in butter or in crushed cheese, until the skin sheds water, and the burned bone is issued from the water; then cure the wound of swelling ointments in which hard flesh grows, and are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then put your finger or fingers on the fundament, and feel what's inside.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent, and between two is the cloth or the wax or bone, where it is close to piercing, if there are no fires except for the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and cure it as before; and do not go too deep in front, lest you cover the foundation that holds, and bring forth excretions without volition; then cure it, as we have said; by chance, it will be sound, and you remove that covering and muddy the area around the foundation, either by tent or other appointed instrument; then fill in the hollow bone that is in the wound, as long as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to maintain the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: and it is when you prick the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation beneath the skin above, so take a pierced tent at the top according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread from that perforation, so that you prick your two or foundation; and handle the top of the thread, and assemble the two pieces together, and hold one against the other, and let it stay for a day or two; and then restrain it sometimes, until the threads that are between two come loose and fall out; then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far inward.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make a hole so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spine-like thorn from which one makes a fistula is very rough on one side and notched; and on the other side it is not, therefore one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	bleedings
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in court also blood, and there is one or more, and they are further from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are further have little moisture, and in court also a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to take a bath so as to ease himself into chambers until the foundation comes out, and then the sons appear; if you hasten, and hold it with pincers, or hold it at your fingernail, then cut it in its roots; and if the uncini cannot hold them due to their moistures, take them up by the napkin, or cloth, or a piece of camlet; and draw them out with your hands, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cautery, and cure them with other cures until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot come out, then enema the patient with an astringent and bitter purgative to wash away what is within the foundation, so that it may come out clearly; when the patient takes precautions, and the sons are further from the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you take them up by your fingernail or pincers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit du large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noie le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I pour corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement un drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide qu’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the flesh or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that the flesh dries in the intestine, and through natural constriction, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to cut at the tip of a spatula or on your fingernail the outer layer above which does not let it moisten; then cure it until it becomes solid as is necessary; and if it cannot dry, then begin again with a stronger scratching than before, until it heals completely and is scabbed over; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A worm is a small abscess located before the breast, and goes quite deep; and often it freezes up tight, and one senses it just like death from numbness, and comes to all parts of the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a piece of duck quill or strong goose feather, and place it on the abscess, so that the circles of purple pigment surround the abscess entirely; then turn your hand around the entire quill until you encircle the abscess, and push it in deep, and pull out the roots of the abscess.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, do so with a file of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	but not pierce, to keep the edges together and pressing And if you see fit, then cauterize the abscess, as is written in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the purgative
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a purgative of silver or archaute, or of melted or hammered iron; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to how they are presented.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore which are presented in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the purgative, small and great, is thus broad, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	et if there is a deviation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced from within; and it has on one side two holes, and on the other one; and the belly is filled with medicines from an animal bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around by small holes, and there is between each hole a space of one finger breadth, then fill these holes with a strong thread of crutted wool, in the shape of X or eight, and assemble the belly as a kid; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then cleanse; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white or something similar, then put it in slightly; then the attendants should press down on both hands together until it is fully inserted, then extract the clyster, and lift up the patient's legs to their full extent, and if the medicine wants to come out, tie it so long as it can; and if the patient sleeps for a whole night afterwards, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purge him in the disease of windiness of belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then continue purging until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, so be it that the fissure is as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle fissure on which the skin will be strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where or what kind of wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and cutting with sword and knife or lance or bow or arrow or similar things; or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from the striking of stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you suspect lightly of abscess hot: so make it heal quickly with cephalic remedy itself if there is little blood flowing from the wound, and let the healing be on the contrary side of the injured part; and give the patient repletion of wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not wish to recover, let his food be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if an aposteme comes there, a moist cloth in olive oil alone, or in vinegar solution; and if there is no hot aposteme, put on the wound all its fresh blood, and it should not be moved by air, powder, as I will say more about later; and if the air has moved it, put on some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, just as I will say about wounds of the belly, with suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to the bone and gapes, and only holds together by a small amount, then scrape it; afterwards, treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of soft skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as cooked testicles and wheat, as well as fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	Et if you find a green putrefaction, and it is not at the bone, so cut out all the putrid part, and wash away the remainder, then heal it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without exception, and it cannot be stayed by medicines, so close the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put on this powder which dries immediately as soon as air has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of living coal, and mix the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood; and then tie it well, and leave it unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does this with quicklime alone, whenever one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arsen has changed the wound, just as it is, do not put on this powder at all; but put on some digestive ointments or made with flour of wheat and water and honey, until it drips down; then cure him with other cures until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you afterwards about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, with no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a hernia, then don't do anything else to the cure, and don't put anything constricting on it, because it harms the ners and makes them retreat; and don't put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the ners is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be strong, like a bath in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and cook it also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	Et si les plaies sont parfondes et elle est chevee et pleine de boue, si la perce ou plus bas leu;
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then watch to see if there are signs of festering around the wound that cause the patient to redden: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder on the wound at the first hour nor bind it for the blood that does not congeal by the time it is perforated, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but put an astringent ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasms, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor any other evil consequences; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the patient with tents and other cures, until they are healed; and if they cannot heal, and labor, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or back, then treat the wound in front first; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the surrounding parts if they are gangrened; and if they are not gangrened, then let the wound heal slowly so that it will facilitate extractions; and for other wounds on other members make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from bursting of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes intestines or the linings of the intestines burst forth, whereby the introduction of poultices is necessary; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, therefore it is better to put the intestines back in gradually, rather than all at once, because the intestines swell shortly after they feel cold, so they go back in more easily, and therefore it is better to set the middle-sized wound straight that is not with other two. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds; and although they are more proper with the suture of the belly, I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has flowed forth, and a grievous thing must be removed, this is done through one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: dampen a sponge or a piece of cloth in lukewarm water only, or boil in water with cypress, squinny, and spikenard, and apply the intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes do this restrainingly, and it is enough to have just one remedy for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or herbs that are cooked, for by this the entrance to very little substance; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids; and the first cure is enough to cut, so no one should cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument for dividing: then cut inside the hollow and do not let blood flow out, and see what shape it is.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, so reset it to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is of no use.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and set his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and thus also if there is an abscess in one of the two parts so position the part that is wounded higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to manage what I say about great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When there are small wounds, place what appears best to you, then take a minister who keeps the entire wound in his hand and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of suturing, and it's that you take one or multiple needles depending on the size of the wound, then leave the chief of the wound for two fingers' breadth, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the siphac, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the four edges of the siphac together; then strain one double strand of thread around the needle for two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound together smoothly, and then leave two fingers' breadth, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease doing this with needles until all the wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore it's necessary that they are moderate; and it's not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they open up the wound before the healing; then cut off the edges of the needles so they do not hurt the patient at night, and place tents or drapes on the edges of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two suffice; the second method is common, and it's that you assemble both sides of the skin and both sides of the siphac together on a needle with moderate strong thread; and when you have pierced all four edges together, then remove the needle from the part where you began, as one sews cloth; and leave space between each stitch the thickness of a lesser finger; this method is known to men, and I stitched a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a sword, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and the intestines were well two palms in size, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back the intestine when it had been gone for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up just until 15 days, and I cured him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctor had judged that he was dying, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where there wasn't any, nor any medicine; and I put a piece of old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and push it from the outside into the inside through the part; when it has pierced the right direction in the right direction, then put the tip of the suture or seam where you have pushed the needle in, and make it pierce on the other side of the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the pelter makers do the pelts, and you leave once the suture from one side and take it up again from the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen calls proper, is this: someone does it, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the ends of the silk to the other end, in such a way: drive an awl or point of the needle close by, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the silk; then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outside part right up to the inside part through the two heads of the silk; then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part right up to the inside part in two other holes of the needle that are on the other side; and this is the manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this phrase, and some confirm it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew hides; and know that when the rupture is in the belly, then sewing is more difficult than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: and is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even as the fire has moved it, so put back the intestine, and the cloth; then put on powder intervening flesh, and if the fire has moved it, put on some ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and cut off the thread, and be sure the stitches are tied, the ligatures, and the splints; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, so put on, soon as it begins to close, a cloth, old and well-worn, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need another medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause community to principal members, it is necessary to apply a thin layer of lard in tempered heat or rose oil around the corners, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or purulence in the belly, and this often happens, then cleanse with black wine tede, and especially if the purulence comes up to the intestine; and then puncture inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the barrenness of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity to its nature of things.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the suture jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned green or black, then you must set right the part that is black, so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and tie the two ends to the lower part of the wound until it is fully extracted when the suture falls out, and the wound is bound.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is rent and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw a man wounded with a lance in his stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there were discharges and flatulence; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to refine it until he was healed, and the openings closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s'aerdent en l'intestine, and ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, and se puet on liier l'intestine d'un fil subtil who est copez de l'intestine d'une beste, in tel maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d'intestine que soit mout descharnez, and puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l'aguille, and en cout l'intestine, and le ramoinne en la routure; and ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d'espearance; and se li plaie est grans and large, meismement quant elle est en l'un des grailes intestines, si n'i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes infected, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it bursts open and flows downwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d'un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n'est sanee, et il n'i a char, ce n'est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c'est à savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu'il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n'i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n'est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j'ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for a fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Saiches that fistula has in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the syphac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and also to that which comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous sanitation, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, then take a tent of earth or iron, if the fistula is straight, so cut it; and if the fistula is twisted, so search with a subtle tent of cloth, because the cloth bends around the twisting; and if the fistula has many pores and you cannot well search it with tents, so cleanse it by one of the pores, for the moisture flows from one pore to another, and purifies it; then bleed as much as your skill allows, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and cut deep into the flesh, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it; and when you know truly where it is, and if it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have said, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the putrid matter and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well purged at the right place, then cut deep into the flesh, as much as you can, and then apply moist tents in medicine aloe, and pour them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments in healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If vein or nerves do not injure the principal members as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, so leave it alone until all corruption is removed, then cure with things that put flesh so long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns to its previous state, know that you are not yet at the end: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep to reach; you cannot go further; if there's only one small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with pincers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, extract all of them, leaving none behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, cut and remove the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	Et if you cannot remove them in one hour, so put the wound thing away from purtifying and leave it until the flesh is purified around the bones, and then they will have easier access to the bones; and if this is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, so wait only for the corruption to be completely removed, then repair the wound; and if there is a great part of the corrupted tissue, and it comes just to the edge of the bone; then you must clean and cover all the way to the edge of the corruption, and then cure it until it is sound.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around XXX years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came to the leg and it became inflamed with a large abscess, and he had no reason to avoid opening; but the physicians, through their foolishness, worked on it so much that the abscess opened, and many matters flowed out, and it became a fistula, and there were many pus-filled lesions that all poured forth and moisture from the body; and many physicians treated him for two years, and there was no cure in the art of healing until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and what flowed out through the pus-filled lesions with great turmoil; and the young man's body became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent on one of these recesses, and then searched all the recesses, and found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then, and cut into one of the recesses until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption was coming right up to the bone inside; I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not heal; then I started again, and found the bone as before, and discovered the corruption continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then removed it, and wondered if I could stitch up the place; but I couldn't until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and pulled it back to its entirety, then treated it with medicines; and it was healed and stitched quickly, and there was no need to continue the treatment except for the patient's weakness, which couldn't endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for evacuation blood often poured out, but it was entirely cleared, and instead of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or opposition from anything at all, neither in coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be done in this manner: take a thread, and stretch it to the top of the bone that appears, and command someone to pull it up; and put another linen strap thicker than the first thread, and tie it above the flesh which is below the bone, and make sure the top stays so that you can remove the corrupt flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you see fit, without injuring the flesh; and put a hot iron or a wooden spatula below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and it must be done so many times as one can see and feel the corruption, and do it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et if the bone is corrupted and does not open and the corruption is in the middle or in one part then uncover all the flesh then put the tisserie under and then soi the corruption from one part to another and be the surgeon above the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the jointure then cut off the corrupted jointure and be the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints then there is no other way but to cut; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the toe of the foot then it is very strong that thing but anyway you must inquire how it opens unto you and cleanse it in all ways that you can but let the vein or nerve not be against you; and know that the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their appearance outside and their size and subtlety and greatness and smallness and hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument that you have need of according to what it requires.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, or by cause defuer; and when you have medicine to cure that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, so it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes death or malice, which is greater than the defect of the member; and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and then afterward the corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body; so hasten to cover it up, and if it is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, like scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar ones, then when the corruption is at the chief of the intestines, cover it, and do not give space for it to come as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes as far as the hand, then cover at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the strength of one's virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, then cover the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, then cover at the ankle joint; and if it comes from above the ankle, then there is no remedy except for the patient's death; and the manner of covering or soaping the member is that you tie it above and below, stretching one minister's rope down and another rope up, and you remove the flesh between the two ropes to a spatula-like width, until the bone is exposed; then cover or soap it, and put a piece of linen on each side, so that the soap does not touch the healthy skin, and brings another lesion and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si décorremens de sang vient quant tu œuvres, si cautérise le lieu hastivement, ou tu mets sus quelques poussières rassaignantes; puis reviens à ta médecine tant qu'elle soit achevée, puis lie le membre navré d'un lien convenable, et le cure tant qu'il soit guézi; et je te dirai ce qui advint à l'homme en mon pied: il lui advint une norre qui semblait être arse de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doigt du pied, jusqu'à ce qu'elle prit tout le pied; et quant l'homme vit la corrosion, si se hâta de couper le pied, et fut guézi; et longtemps après lui revint la corruption ou doigt de la main, et il vint à moi, et je lui mis sus choses répercussives après la mundification du corps, et ne put cesser les corruptions; et il vit que je lui coupais la main, et je ne vou, que j'avais espérance de répercuter la matière; et doutai aussi si je tailloie sa main, qu'il ne mourût, car les vertus de l'homme étaient faibles; et il se déspera tout, et revint en sa terre, et se hâta de couper sa main, et fut guézi; et je n'ai ce conte fait que pour ce que l'on fait autrefois, si on en a besoin.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Abscess comes on the charnut in its place and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and the flesh remains open, just like vellum; and the skin above is as thin as delicate curtains, and does not run all the way to the bone or all the way to the nerve, and such disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone or in front of it, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is like when you cut around it entirely, and similarly when it is thin, just like curtains; and it does not hurt because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin is healing, and the corruption is not in front, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it with a clyster like this: look to see if the swelling is great, and the pus that comes out is of bad odor, then take Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of oil, lard, and honey, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey; then take what you need according to your necessity, and mix it with water and honey, and use it as a clyster on the swelling, and stop up the wound; and leave the medicine there for two hours, then draw it out by squeezing; do this many times until the swelling is gone, and the pus is drained; and sometimes one uses water from ashes when this medicine is not present, which you make by pouring water over vine ash, then stirring it well, and using it as a clyster, until you know that the swelling is well drained; and if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water from ashes, then use water and honey or a little lard mixed in, which has properties to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the skin healthy; and when you have done this, and you have faith that the swelling is well drained, then use something that makes flesh grow, such as diaphanous powder, mixed with rose oil and wine; or you may use some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties of ointments; and if the wound on the breast is small, and the clyster cannot enter it, then enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and apply to it an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, then just leave it alone, so that only the vessel or the clyster can enter, and if the pus that comes out is above, then cut or move it lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bow is in its deepest part, do not let it linger with flesh; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare it in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest point that is, for when the bow is in its deepest part, do not let it linger with flesh and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare it thus: so that the bow goes down slightly and does not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put on the skin, and spread a cloth of linen that covers all the skin; then cut at the strongest point near the nipple which is no larger than the first one, then anoint with oil on another cloth according to the quantity of the nipple, and place it on the nipple of the breast to ease the bow, and do not remove the great cloth away from what happened once a month; and that which is on the nipple of the breast often removes to remove the bow, and knows what comes out of the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough or indigestible; and take care if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the nature that emerges on the nipple of the breast, then knows that the breasts are already healed, and approach health; and then release it in the morning, or the third day, and when you remove the wound, then change the other cloth, and renew the anointing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts emit undigested bowels after many days, know that the breasts are not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not lose hope of health, for the healings approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people who put in new flesh into their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigestive bile jumps out of the chest after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast is slow to heal, and is far away, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as defined by ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take defined ointment and mix it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine; then cook it and use it; and do the same thing with honey that has been cooked to expand, when defined ointment is not present, or you take myrrh, aloes, and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire; then glue it onto a cloth, and place it on the chest, and sometimes administer aristology for a long time, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour from violets and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it over the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is delayed, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard muscles, or in ligaments; so apply a cure for fistula, as we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the apostema of the armpit
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other digits; and when it is neglected and no care is taken, then the abscess becomes putrid, and runs and discharges pus as long as it runs along the root of the nail, and perhaps all the way to the end; and comes to the bone, so that there is pungent pain, and the joints of the fingers are wide, and the color is dark red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses upon the flesh, begins to prick and bleed, then it is necessary that you place the point of the cautery under the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut away that subtle and light flesh, and put on top the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all; then apply ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et if the decay is in the bone, then cut it out and remove the excess, for as long as the bone is decaying there, it cannot heal; and if you see the decay eating away, then cut it out as described earlier, until it is healed; and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first make it whole; then cut the ulcer of the gum so that it heals by cutting across in a diagonal direction above, and take care that the edge does not reach the flesh which is below the ulcer, for the patient will feel too great a pain; and if there is, then place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The bones which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and by chance there may be one or two where there are bones, and sometimes a knot, and one of them is born at the root of the joint, or birth is in some of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Whoever is born without any defect in the shoulder or does not move, and whoever is born with the joint of the shoulder, by chance he moves; the shape of that one who is fat is so light, in such a manner: it is shaped like its root from a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: it's better to leave it as is.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or should be at the back of the skin, it is necessary that you cut the flesh first to just above the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable string for this, then take care until he is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come from having to assemble come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut the seam, if it should be repaired according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or wet cloths in rose oil, so they do not adhere; or you put between two thin pieces of leather, until the wound is sewn, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to any of its two with the palm, then cauterize that wound as it is necessary.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are swollen and distended, full of superfluous melancholic substances, which come forth in many parts of the body; and it is more common to occur in the legs of those who walk on foot and work or carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore that you administer to him sometimes purging of gall, and then heal the wound with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is done in two ways: one way is when you strike it and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open up the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this way: first rise the patient's leg to a hot bath very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned, then strain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the ankle; then cut the vein in one place, or two places, or three, with a wide cut, then lift it up and drain out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtues of the patient can endure; and then bind it, and command that he eat meats bringing forth dark blood; and recommence the evacuation and purification when the veins are full, and it is necessary for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: Raise the patient's leg if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and rinse the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swollen. And if you don't have any bathing water, heat it by the fire, and then cut around the vein at the long part of the thigh or below the ankle; then apply the skin to the incision, and scrape away the vein on each side until it appears when one touches it; and one sees it red and black, and when it goes into the skin it seems like a white string. Then put the thread underneath, so that it is lifted from the skin, and then tie it at another needle, as you have done first; then cut another size, or more if you need to, then lift it, and cut at the toe of the foot, then train and lift just to the second size; then pull it out in size after size until it is all clean, then cut; and if you can't train and lift, put a needle on every strong thread double, and tie and train, and put underneath the thread, and turn your hand from one side and the other, so that it comes out; and be careful not to cut, for if it cuts, one cannot train or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient. And when you have trained it all, then place a moist cloth on the site of the wound in vinegar and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together at once, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it obliquely, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron that one uses to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut straight, so it cuts the vein; and it is a thick curve, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry ground where there is no moisture; and it happens to occur elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to the putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, just as it comes inside the body through serpents and worms, located between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the onset of this swelling are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the skin changes, and the swelling begins to emerge forth, like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the swelling appears, it is necessary that you envelop a piece of cloth around one and a half to two inches from the start, and bind it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it subsides at the back, you should re-envelop the cloth and bind; and if it is too long, you should cut off part of it, and envelop the remaining portion, but do not cut it in its root until it is all gone; for if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh, and bring about an abscess or a boil at that place, and a bad disease; therefore, it is necessary to treat it gradually little by little up to the end, and leave nothing remaining in the body; sometimes this swelling appears when it has been treated for five palms of length, or ten, and one man came to me whose it was ten palms long, and when you cut it, there will be one or two sores or pustules, and then a perforation right through to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and the matter inside should be emptied, and medicines administered for some time to prevent further occurrence, then the cure is as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at this wound sometimes many raindrops fall, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or the foot, and it comes out very much pus, and from which it jumps out raindrops; cure it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vermin that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "bovine illness", because it has often affected oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it move from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, such as those of vermin, serpents, lice, and ascarides in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this has often happened.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and pulled, one can only wait until it goes: so then you must tie the area above and below with a strong thread tightly, then cut on top and pull it forth, and if the vein is deeply buried in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize with fire on top until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, then hold below it a small coil tightly, then cut on top, and pull it forth; and it is necessary to use the patient with purifying medicines for bad humors and warn them against meat that causes harm.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windy weather
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and it moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm. And soon after, I saw it rise just like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver as it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder, and then it coursed through the entire body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved like that from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had wanted to know what would happen if the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman's body was dry, and her veins were uncovered, and because of this the constraint of this vision appeared; and there is no appearance according to this reason with those who are delicate and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then hasten to bind above and below; and then copiously apply on top until those swellings constrained by wind settle back down; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it coming to your hands, seek the cure from those who counteract windiness, such as fetid pills and serapin pills and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their kinds is that there are those with large points, small ones, and hooked ones, and tied-on ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that hits a member so it hits in two ways: or in principal member it pierces, such as skull, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears to you: so it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow, for many die afterwards in various dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not very deep, then treat it and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the head when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the skullcap that is above the brain jumps out, is when there is darkness, dizziness, fainting, and redness in the eyes; and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it loses the sense of smell through the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice; and a jump of moist white flesh resembling pustules, and jumping also like charred wood; and if this sign appears to you, then take care and treat the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it has been stuck in something hard and not empty; and by chance the arrow moves just like the hairs, and comes out with cold black blood, and there is coldness, sweating, and fainting: know then without doubt that the patient dies.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the kidneys is that without foam or bubbles it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they sigh deeply and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the cover of the breastbone, it is between the little ribs; and pours out great gall and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow shoots or falls on the stomach, by chance some undigested thing from the wound may jump out of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow falls on the belly, and no fragment of the arrow passes through the intestine route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow falls in the bladder, and the urine leaps out and flows away, and the patient feels very painful: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the nape and the heel and the knee and the leg and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of which you should act similarly.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one person that an arrow hit the forehead in the root of the nose: I tried it, and pulled it out on the other side under the ear fat, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow that had hit the fatty part under the eyebrow under the skin, and the arrow was stuck, and I could only grasp its point by pushing it towards the nose, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all of which was done without any harm to the ears; the man was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arab arrow with ears; I drew out the barbs, and made it subtlety until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And extract an arrow from the man's belly where it had been lodged, and thought he was dying; and then after XXX days, his condition didn't change; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and it came out whole, and there wasn't any bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you find the man who an arrow fell on his back, and it was closed with a wound above; and the arrow remained inside him, and didn't change its natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was closed; and it remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And bring an arrow to the king of princes at home, which was stuck in the child's leg, and it was slightly declining towards the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged I was called to the treatment after she had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I searched for it with all subtle finesse and did not find it; and he felt piercing and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put a poultice on the spot attractive and digestive, because the skin did not swell; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the poultice there for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his belly; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound for several days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which had been lodged at the site; then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that medicine, as much as the bone of the arrow appeared visible; and the remedy went well beyond four months, and then healed so that I put in forceps, and drew it out from one side and the other, but could not get it to come out; and then I did not cease to refine and invent various ways with instruments, until I took one day as forceps well done, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I followed it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or t'ai dit la qualité de l'extraction d'aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sur ce que je ne dis mie, car les livres ne peut mie tout apprendre; mais les sages maîtres comprennent bien poque chose, et sur ce qui est présent et défait, trouvez nouvelle œuvre, et neuve estroiente, au-dessous des choses étranges qui arrivent en cet art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from members or are fixed except in two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which jumps out by the side where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump out now, so let it stay until the flesh is purged around it and the issue is opened; and similarly if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot come out, so let it stay thus for some days, and move each day; and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, so pierce all around with a very fine point, until the flesh around it is stretched, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Et if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said occur to the patient: then do not pull it out at all, but let it remain as long as it is even after a few days, for if the arrow comes just up to the sacrum, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come just to the sacrum, and the patient remains some days without bad accident, then persuade him to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very deeply and cannot come out further, then administer gentle heat around, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is stuck in the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere; and if you find it, pull it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then let the wound be large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has ears where it's stuck, remove the flesh that's stuck for two parts up to where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, lest you would pull it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and consider how you can draw out the arrow without danger, soon or late, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then do as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from the other side, or if it does not appear to be one's own, or the skin is swollen in the area and one can see or feel something out of place: cut then above, so far as the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it springs forth now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it alone and continue the extraction until it does come out; and if there is still some part of the arrow left inside, fill the entire arrow with all the force; and if the arrow falls off, and you see that it must be administered with a poultice, administer the instrument with a shaved edge, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; then push forward, and if the arrow is removed, then put the instrument to the point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits or falls on the thigh or belly or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cut into it, then cut there; and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then cut away the wound if necessary; and cure it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to pull out arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, to push forward at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped thus:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and pulling is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins by which one is cured, of which there are sixteen on the head, to wit: two batons that are behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the crown of the head; and the two grooves that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins by which one commonly bleeds are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is located on the left side, and people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fistula", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is located on the right side, and people call it "vein of the belly", and it lies above the elbow, and that is the one by which one bleeds, which becomes manifestly apparent above the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the wrist and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is located below the curve of the left side pocket, and the second is on the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and with emigraine, and with gout; and the quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand or other thing, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and not once a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary that the bandages be too thin; and the healing should cross, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the bandages when they are too fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding from the two veins that are in the eyelids so helps with the eyes, and with tinea, and with gout, and with conjunctivitis in the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the quality of their bleeding is that the patient strains their neck by twisting without any bond, just as before; then let it bleed, and let the blood be from the travers, a little longer than the width of a flame, because there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the bandages are fine, by chance they break; then make flow of blood, until you need it, and then bind on cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood from the neck vein is so valuable for a treatment of ague, and fever that is not far away, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and similarly when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient will tighten their throat, then strain their neck to the left hand, and take a thin flame long, and put it in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start flowing now; and do not go too far down or make the blood flow according to your need, then let it lie overnight, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the blood.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood from the two gullets greatly helps with the constriction of the spleen, and the beginning of swelling, and many diseases, and empetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and ulcers; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens their throat above and below, as we have said; and let the master be sitting on top of the patient's head, and the patient sit in a siege, then bleed the vein from long, but not too wide, then temper the flow of blood as much as is necessary; then do the other side in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold back the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound will be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the healing of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The humor of the veins of the lips above is helpful for ulcers in the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and for cracks in the lips, and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, which are known by being black and having small black vessels around them: cut then both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, so cut the thicker one from each part; and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing beneath the tongue is of great help after the cephalic healing, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is that the patient should sit between your hands in the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look beneath on each side a black vein: heal then both, and do not go too far down, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	Veins of the neck which are commonly healed are healed in two manners: either they puncture to the entire flame-red martyr large, or olive-green subtle as cutting trenchants, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the mirtin bandage is very well-known, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and free-flowing with a lot of visible blood, and which contain a lot of blood and turmoil; and this is the form of olive-green flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and finely pointed, and it is for bleeding the fine veins, or where there is fine yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to bleed, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and there comes a flow of blood, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and he should not be pricking the flame, but cutting like anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it, and change another; or you want some rest from it, or you let blood flow in its place through the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut the flesh around the anus, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you extract the arm, so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with a needle and then bind the arm, and cut the vein around the anus; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: escape then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it flowing up there just like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is arterial blood: hasten then, and put your hand on top lengthwise, then remove your hand if the bleeding ceases, which often happens; bind the arm, and let it be thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stanched, and it flows out, and medical help is not present, then cut into the artery if it opens up, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a rind of fig tree bark, and cut it, and take one half and tie well just to the other side; if the wound does not stain, that is good; if it does not, then cure it with the powders that stop blood; and the stoppage is not too grievous in many dispositions because of the small size of the wound and the power of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the vein-opening is so good that it treats blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the one who is doing the saining to beware of the nerve which is below, and if he goes too deep and finds the nerve, it swells and the blood flows freely, and by chance cannot be healed; and this nerve often appears in some men due to its subtlety, so it is necessary that you use the anesthetizing instrument; and bind the nerve with all your might.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic region so helps, that it brings blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed at the point of the olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped vein, for this is the most safe of all veins, since there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest position, and do not worry if one does not succeed at first, and one reattempts; and by chance some people's joints become swollen, when one attempts at first, but does not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is only necessary to preserve health, and to ward off future illnesses; and it should be done in one of the three veins that are suitable: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and autumn, and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two hours or three in the morning.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The doctor who is entrusted with treating diseases has no fixed schedule, but whenever need arises by day or night, in all hours and at all times; and it is not necessary to treat children until they are fourteen years old, nor a pregnant woman except for three-quarters of the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one bleed those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to heal themselves, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that they purge their intestines with a light enema if they have retained many flatulence; so that the veins do not attract superfluous substances from the intestines that are harmful to the principal members; nor does one heal oneself when too fatigued by food, or drunk, as long as it persists, nor when dropsical; and after colic passion, vomiting, and evacuation of the belly, and repeated exposure to a woman, and labor, watchfulness, and insomnia, and all that is contrary to virtue, or because of arms or body; then refine the humors if the blood is thick, by means of food, drinks, and medicines, as long as you have the power; then enter into a bath, unless something prevents it, in order to subtilize the blood, and heal oneself from the wound around the third rib, as we have said; and take care that day to avoid labor, exertion, and lust, and similar things; and be cheerful and joyful, and let the healer be higher than he who is being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then straighten the band above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow; and then wet the healer's hand with a little old oil, and put their left hand on that wound below the ribcage where they want to heal.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, and si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, and ensi est on de ceus; and si il aouvre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at first, that's good; if not, then it should be reopened a little below or above quickly, if the swelling is not excessive.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the swelling is great, and the patient is afraid, let it last one day or two, and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form quickly; do not enter the bath, but resume treatment if it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, trust in this very same hole for all the flame directly; and work with a bit of haste, so long as the swelling persists; for this has often happened when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swollen place, do not rebegin the incision, and put a little of linen oil upon it, for it lightens the body's blood, and is moistening in this place the linen that the oil; and thus administer the linseed oil to each incision that you make on veins, in order to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing makes triple and bowels easy, when one puts it upon the swollen place; so subtlely does the skin and separate when it is too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not incised except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put a moist sponge on the swelling in water and a little warm oil, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it remains on the swelling some days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm; and if you see, put something of aloes or myrrh dissolved in calamus juice, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance of the wound at the basilica; then put your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut; but make a dry poultice to harden the swelling, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is weak and helpless, and has need of bloodletting, that you make a larger wound on them, and let the flames be wide; and for the one who is feeble, do the opposite, and it is better to nurse them often and frequently, and this way of nursing is safe from disfigurement of blood and numbness of nerve, and is worth more than long or wide healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body is suited for bleeding, it is necessary to give moist bread in apple juice; if they are heated, then treat them with bloodletting three or four times. And if they have a cold complexion, then mix moist bread beforehand with a sweetened syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he pukes blood, after a lot of blood has been released, it is necessary that he drinks a broth made from fat and a subtle aromatic syrup, and uses the other things we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to stretch out his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to stretch out his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or in 9 hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is a lot of blood inside the body that has already been heated up and brings fever; it must be drawn out in great quantity and the opening widened until it stops bleeding. Then you should reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when he is recovering, so that death does not come instead of recovery, and this happens many times when the nurse is neglectful; and it's not necessary when you see the arm being loosened, and blood issuing a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly then; nor if it is curved, should you stretch out the arm quickly, for that would be bad; but let it stay until he recovers a second time; or you should point to the tip of the flame, until the congealed blood which has been drawn off at the vein issues forth, and place on top the same amount of oil, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, let him heal in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is healed in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	Et the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water, until the flesh is red; then bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, and then make an incision along the way, neither wide nor long; and make the pores large, and heal near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out without harm, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if this is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it puts more stress on the patient than in winter; and the healing of this wound is better than all other wounds, since there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the swelling of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: strain the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is emptied, so that you can see it; and if the skin breaks, and you clean it entirely from top to bottom, then nothing will be painful; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are under all denuded of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood flow as much as is needed, then put oil and a ligature on the vein to close it quickly, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood of the wrist vein on the left hand is worth to the disease of mice, and do it just like I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wound of the sophene is worth all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the knees, and retention of fluids, and disease of the reins, and of the groins and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its wound are such that the patient bathes his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein as long as it bleeds, and wraps above the jointure of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above it flows a great deal of pus; this then heals either a larger abscess or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you let it flow above the foot, then be wary of the nerves that are below, and let the blood flow across as if cutting; and let there be no swelling.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound fails to heal the first time, it then reopens a little higher up because the bone is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the same treatment of the sophene on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its blood is worth to the pain in the groin, when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	Et the quality of his bath is such that the patient enters the bath and stretches above the ankle four days by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then he bathes in all ways you can and crossing; and beware that you do not cut him, for the joints are healthy and she is very responsive to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't believe me, then heal any wound that opens on the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make so much flow of blood as you see, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wind wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of clay, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation which is without wounding is done in two ways: either it is all fire or no fire; and the ventosation that is made by wounding and blood extraction is done on 14 parts of the body, from which some are all at the head; and others are in the neck; and two others in the two armpits; and the ventouses under the chin; and the ventouses on the shoulders; and the ventouses above the hips; and the ventouses in both arms; and the ventouses in both legs; and the ventouses of both ankles; and this ventosation does not treat with blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it is not weakened at all, just as one makes a wound dressing; and it should not be administered, either all fire or no fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness or for the sake of habit, let us ventilate each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between, and throughout; for there are those who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head; and there are those who find repletion and redness on their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness around the eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see through their own blood, and maimed and dead, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sweat of the mumps so helps the headache that comes to the eyes, and is not necessary only after evacuation of the whole body; and this ventosation is in place of the cephalic purge, and is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and therefore it is not suitable for elderly people or those with cold-headed diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And one who often recovers from this becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the ventous a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventosation within the neck is in the position of the throat and basilica, and therefore it is valuable for the constriction of the belly, and for the splitting of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for replenishment; and one must not press too hard, for if it holds too firmly, so obligation or stomach or heart may ensue.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations are on both sides of the neck, and therefore they are valuable for headaches, and obtalmia, and migraines, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the position of the throat's health and basilica; and one must command the physician to express his hand when placing, so he does not crush the artery, nor cause excessive bleeding of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The bleedings below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bleedings of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The bleedings on the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the sides are as valuable as the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the physician not to strike too deeply by fontanelle, for the place is bare of flesh, and there lie beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventous on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the ventous be large and made of clay, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventouses on the legs are cleansing in appearance, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urine, and restore flowers; and they are in place of the two shins and two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring about numbness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the ventous is that you apply it first empty, and then suck in a temperate manner, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the ventouses, and take heed to the disposition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to prick only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make fine the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is extremely thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we are only satisfied with one attempt.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, so we repeat it often; and if the blood is thick, then let it flow deep, and the ends be that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for him who has tough skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the leeches with oil appetizer and dissolvent: if it's in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it's in winter, with rue oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to whom one applies a remedy has tender skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather to wash after the leeching with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain flower water, or another similar one.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he rises easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d'aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d'anet ou de camomile, ou d'autres semblans;
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are colerics when they begin to heal; and if their blood is too thin and inflamed; then it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces at ease, and similar things; and occasionally drink pomegranate juice, and mutton fat, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, then take honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and occasionally drink little, and occasionally pomegranate juice and small birds and pigeons; and the day before he is to be bled, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary for some people to give certain men treacle or muscat once before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtle, but it does not need to be drunk by those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Les ventouses que sont mises sans ferir sont celles qui sont mises sur le foie, et sur la mie, et podagre, et sur le ventre et la boude et les reins et la hanche, car ce membre ne souffrent pas de ferir sur ou les. Et ne le fait on que pour attirer sang de membre en membre, si comme nous mettons sur les mamelles quant le né sainne; pour oster la viscosité qui est au membre, si comme nous mettons ventouses sur le ventre et sur la boude pour amenuisier le membre; et oster la douleur, quant il y a opilation ou pierre, si oster par sa vertu attractive par hasard l'opilation, ou désaérer la pierre de son lieu; et ainsi fait-elle lorsque on la met sur le foie et sur la mie lorsque il y a viscosité retenue, et ces ventouses sont administrées vides pour sucer tant simplement; et quelquefois sont administrées ensemble feu, et quelques fois pleines d'eau tiède, si comme en maladies du pleurésin, et de telle manière on emplit la ventouse d'eau chaude ou de eau où il a cuit des herbes convenables à cela.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont,
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: take the candle of wax or the lining and put it in the poultice across the rod that is inside the poultice, so that the wick be at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the member and the wick should be on the puncture we said, so when you want to, if there's vapor, remove the poultice; and take the lining as before, and start again often, if you need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the poultice therefore which is administered in disease of pleurisy, always wet, has no rod or puncture, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is put on the member only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without poultices are administered except in limbs where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in denuded areas of flesh, such as toes or nails, and others like them; and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in clear water without injury, take them; and put one in clear water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices; and when they are full and swollen, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Se ceu non, if not
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	Et if the veins do not wish to take, then rub the place with fresh blood, or put an awl there until the vein opens, and then put it on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will settle; and when you see that they flow, then powder some aloes and silk thread, or cinders, so they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Learn, dear son, that foolish men do not look at this chapter, nor have they ever seen any of the ancient books, nor read any letters; and because of this, the science is strange in our land, for I never found good; and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, which I studied so much that I treated the science, and through experiment, and through the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are prepared, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remaining on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and learn it from others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When bodily injury or dislocation or twisting or breaking comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something prevents this, such as frailty of body, or old age, or fever; or if the time is not very cold, or too warm; and mix no cold things, namely cold baths, and flesh of hare and deer, and do not drink any wine, nor mix any greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot aposteme, or spreading of matter to the member; then revive the patient under their previous government which they are used to.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that make thick nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and pork belly, and beef, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with thick nourishment the breaks are repaired more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reattached or joined according to their nature due to the separation of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as children's bones; but do not worry, reset on the broken bone large tendons that hold and join the member together, until it becomes strong like before; and do not abandon your work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with rich meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that broken bones are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breakage of the head is one thing, and the breakage of the breast or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a break with wound, and a break with a small crack in one piece.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each manner have its own device, and proper instrument in restoration, according to what the remembrance comes into place; and know the break of bone by that the joint is twisted, and appears well through a gap, and sounds on pressing with the hand; and when there is no tortuosity nor touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, since there is no break; but it may have tortuositivity, or splitting, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So do not move him with your hand, but put on the medicines that come later, and then strain him gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes in a circle, and are the two parts of the joint, it is necessary to set them equal now, so that abscesses do not come to life there; and if abscesses come to life there, then let it be left alone for a day, until the abscess is appeased; then set it equal as you can smoothly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this one is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces; then strain it, as is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, so that they are stretched over two parts, whether it be a hand or foot, or to one's own hand, or to two cords, or to one cord and one's hand; and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then reassemble by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and take care that through your work there does not come injury or pain to the patient; and join well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then dress it beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who bring about hot apostemes and contractions in the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is set, then instruct the patient well not to move it, nor while awake nor asleep, nor while turning nor in any other way; and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet set, and it behooves you to put it in such a disposition that it feels no pain; and take care that it be placed correctly, so that there are no tortuosities when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or abscess, he puts a hot compress on the abscess, and one that takes away the inflammation, and lets it be thus for some days; then he strains on his stakes, and are of about half a yard long, made from mulberry bark, or from willow, or from palm leaves, and are according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the stake he puts on the breakage be a little bit bigger and wider than the others; and be as long as it needs to be for the small or large member; then strain on the stakes just as you did at the first joint, then tie above with a thread, just like at the first joint on the breakage; tighter above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of fine linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bonds with twisted linen threads, and it's a great error, because the bond cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it's not necessary that there should be less than two finger-widths between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after straining in their joints, then put beneath them strips of linen or shorn wool, so that he does not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the break, and the ligaments are torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not need to strain all broken limbs with splints on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Car when the limbs are great, there is no need to apply ointments more than after 2 or 7 days, or more according to the safety of abscess happening; and behold here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring breakage to many conditions, and indeed for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of ointment restoring the break and dislocation and twist: take 10 parts of absinthe, laudanum, and aloe, and 5 parts of gum arabic and myrrh; mix with 8 parts of aloes, and grind into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and will quickly restore broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, 10 times; myrrh and aloes, 9 times; aloe, 6 times; Armenian bolic, 10 times, and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to plaster joints and separated bones back into their places, and to soothe the pain that follows, and to use the bone for a fracture: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and leaves of terrestrial poplar, and grind together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of a fractured bone and to ease the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vernal grass, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, each in equal parts; grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster that is stronger than the first one, when a stubborn abscess comes during the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Pren racines de vismalve, and take seed of flax, balaustium, melilote, and sansue, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in one part; and crush, and cook with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, things slightly warm and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take myrrh and human hair or bird feathers, and gallnut, and mix them equally, and grind into a powder, and make an ointment and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has their bone moved from its place; if no loosening for several days. If pain comes to the site, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moisture, and plunge into water, and lift out the limb until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind with a nut, as long as you are sure there is no hot abscess; and calm down the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little poultice, and do not strain it so hard as before; and treat subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is gone and red, and pain and swelling are all removed, and you need to apply ointment and binding again, then do so, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Et s'il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s'aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j'ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n'est, saiches que norrissemens n'i puet venir; arose lou donques d'aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c'est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n'i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l'ovrer droitement.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breakages, and various forms, and their causes are determined; for there are breakages that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collar bone is broken entirely until it reaches the syphac which is below the bone, just as made by an axe or a wedge; and therefore this kind of breakage is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone above, without piercing it, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an enclosed percussion, or splitting or cracking of the collarbone, or falling onto stone, or falling on top of stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent breaking which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is healed in the bone as fine as a thread, and the fracture is small, and therefore this breakage is called "capillary"; and if the wound that is made by piercing with an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, makes the piece of bone go down below, and is like hair split when blacksmiths strike sparks on hot irons; then the bone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have moist bones, like those of an infant; and it happens with all these kinds of breakages where small pieces are separated as they are; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breakings by the pulling away above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and through the corrupt flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then the black breaking appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breaking, take note of the patient's accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar conditions in many dispositions, then it cannot be cured without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no unbelievable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the moon that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the skin below the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	Et if the breaking of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut into the broken part thus: and this means that you take hold of the patient's head wounded, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as gentle as you can, and if bleeding comes out while uncovering the bone, or an abscess is formed, then apply the aid that it requires, and this means that you fill the space with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut into the narrow cutting before, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put in another trimming larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have various trimmings of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and rough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer trimmings with tapers, not too deep lest they go through the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes in its own place to the edge of the bone, so that you have tapers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one taper on the bone and turn it to your right as long as you know the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do this all around, then cut off the edges of the bone which are between the pits, and make it more subtly than you can, lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and trimmed the bone, then it is necessary that you take up the sharpness which remains of the bone to any other instrument like a chisel, but it must be more keen and subtler than the other chisel; and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with the instruments; then cure the wound with tentings and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which the Gauls say, who is more sound; and he binds it very tightly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the breaking appears moles; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, whose form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut off from one side, and the part is bent in two directions, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upwards, so that you lightly chip around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is below; if it is torn away from the bone, then lightly remove it, for one removes it without causing harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the skin, and the bone is scraped away only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and scrape off the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then scrape with great scrapers, and after with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle cuttings and breakages, it is necessary that you bring cause according to its direction; and this is not something that can be easily learned by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the scab is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doubled cloth in two or three places, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not irritate the scab, then administer above the other layer, and do not tighten it too much until it holds only the wound; and leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscess is pacified, then release it, and administer medicines such as roots of linden, and farina of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and administer again without mastication; and watch that the wound is soon clean, lest you leave ointment or allow a bowstring to be assembled on the cloth of the brain, for when the bowstring assembles above the skull, they will flow and burst forth, and great harm will come to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the scab, it becomes inflamed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, which is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no other remedy comes but for the medicine that has been applied, which has such virtue, so it is necessary to take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of vinegar, and apply it to the affected area; then proceed with the treatment in the manner of treatments that are necessary until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one only by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, so it is necessary that you stop your small knife or pessary from the nail, and put this breakage inside your index finger's tip, and then push it forward gently, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot be brought back to its place by the finger, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the top of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the breakage is of two parts, so do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has subsided, then trim the top of the nail with a cloth of linen, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another piece from the other side, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the pores of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said some doctors that one must smear tents with tallow, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It doesn't seem right to me, but it is necessary that they be smeared with a mixture of egg white and miller's flour; then leave the tent alone until the bone is hard and the cartilages are tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one binds an oyster shell to the neck instead of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and keeps the break together, and blows on the patient's breath between; then do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of daguanion.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the apostemes do not come forth, then apply an emplaster by way of a poultice, made from barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then put it on light fires, and do not bind it too tightly; and if the break in the plaster is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the fragments to suitable instruments, then cauterize the wound, and cure what remains of flesh and bone, and binding, as emplasters and ointments are suitable for this; and if there is no wound within the plaster, then cure the tent, and put leaden poultices on it, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	(The text continues with a new topic: "On the dislocation of the jawbone")
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated below, and there is no wound beyond, and the break is only as far as the coronoid process, and it is not broken in two, except for the coronoid process, then one can tell this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jawbone, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, then place your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into its original position using the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved or dislocated, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a poultice, and put on it a double cloth; and put on the cloth a large strap well made, or a piece of leather equal to the jawbone, long and wide according to its shape, and tie it as tightly as you can, and command the patient to rest, and give him light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If thou seest that the figure changeth, then loose it on the third day, and then put back to point what hath changed; and put upon a plaster, with powder of mill with abundance of egg or farina of wheat, after thou hast removed the cerote; and put upon a light linen plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the disposition of the patient changeth not, leave it thus until he be healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess breaks out, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out; but rather, with suitable instruments, extract it carefully.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the plasters suitable for this, to stop bleeding, until he be healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks many times before the shoulder, and the break is in three manners: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the aid that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then set the break evenly with your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere made of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps to the outside because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatreil, and puts a pillow under the shoulder; and have your assistants press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the break to your hands, and if you find it debris-covered, then it is necessary that you cut through it; and pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then use one of the cutting instruments you have; but put this instrument under the forceps to protect the surrounding tissue.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	et semble une cuiller, and is not shaved, and be as wide as it ought to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two knobs, just as you see, and one should be large, and the other stouter, just like the rutting of the wound that you made when you dealt with bones; and when you are sure of a hot aposteme, so count the wound, and if the rutting is small, or you doubt hot aposteme, then embalm the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess breaks out, then soak one cloth in rose oil and azime and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The osteum of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you place on the bone the plaster made from mill powder and egg white, and put light sausages on top, and put a spear below the saddle, if you need one; then take a very wide band, three palms long, and put double cloth on top of the sausages, and the plaster; then take a fine strap three inches wide and long, and wrap it around that band so that the head of the band is hanging; and place the strap on the shoulder blade, and turn the band around the neck, and under the saddle, and under the sick one's shoulder; and each time, observe every part, and when you see that the ligament holds the shoulder blade well, and you clearly see that the strap does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain it; and make the patient sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the saddle, to lift the aid in high; so that the break of the forceps is alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents come, for up to 20 days; then begin the plaster again, if you see that it needs it, and tighten and leave it thus until it is restored; and she is restored in about 28 days, and to some people in less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and points under the key, then do so, and extract it, and do what we have said about breaking off an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the chest
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the far end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in mid-air, if it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all together, and by chance may vomit blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and knows not well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient sits on their backside, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly places it evenly in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plaster and cloths above the subtle roll with salt or other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around again, and restrain it well, and reward each hour with linen, and if it becomes loose, then restrain it again; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the wound, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the plaster, and address what has come from the ways of cures; then reset the plaster, and restrain until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs does not come except in stout men after the back and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are pliable; and one knows this well through examination by touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is that you put it back equal to where it was, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply a poultice, and bind it with an iron band, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and piercing, just as from a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and he swears oaths, and vomits and spews great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous health, and the ancients have attributed great skill to it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one says that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push back the break outwardly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do so, unless a hot abscess comes to be.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one puts poultices on the place, to draw strongly, and this seems like reason; however, there is doubt whether the poultice attracts the superfluities to the place due to the weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the place with a wet cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal pressure around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear by the bone which presses against the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the broken ribcage, and put something underneath the instrument to protect the sac; and then one must cut the bone, and pull out slightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound shut if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears, then place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on top of it, and place a poultice on the area; and care for the area as needed to treat the abscess, and be cautious on the side where it is located, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the break occurs at the bone of the neck, and then it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you see that you don't know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortal in many conditions, and if they are numb and feel well when one tightens and pricks them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the back of the spine, and you see that you don't know if it is healed or not, then take note if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back there is ventosity and evacuation without voluntary movement; and when one soothes him on his belly, there is evacuation without voluntary movement.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is bent over his back and wants to settle down, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor much in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, by putting rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine, until it is calmed; then put a comforting and drying ointment on top, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to cover on the joint; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then cure with ointment releasing flesh, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", then put your handkerchief from your left hand into the other hand to your power, then put the ointment and stone on top, if you need it; then hold it steady, and if there are dislocated bones, then set them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Not often does the hip bone break, and if it breaks, then there is not much diminution at the top; and it becomes long, and declines downwardly, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and piercing, and swelling up what has broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the remedy is that you stretch out your hand to it, so that you are above the break; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then put equal pressure on that break, until it returns to its natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break becomes apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place, then apply an ointment, and then put a wooden or bone instrument on top, and steady the break so that it does not move; and fill the area below the ribs with something, until the sides are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them, until the hot abscess is calmed, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and steady it as needed, unless there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the cut and the head of the arm, and if it breaks, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take a wooden stick of mulberry wood, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads with two bandages, and bend them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw his broken arm onto the stick, until it comes to the elbow, and has in the middle a curve of wood, then bend it upon some heavy thing or have the assistant stretch it down; then place the break even with your hands together, until the break returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should bind the patient to his bedstead, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two attendants to hold each what is on the bedside table in their hands, and the other to stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, so strain it below the skin, and above the skin, and extend each of the attendants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the skin is close to the head of the shoulder, so it is necessary that you put the thread halfway under the armpit, and the other one towards the neck, under the skin; and likewise if the skin is towards the neck, so it is necessary to put the thread lightly, without labor, until the skin is even on the joint, and on the neck; then tie the skin as it should be, and strain it, lest apostemes come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses do come, then do not bind it at all until seven days, and put a moist cloth on it in a sheltered place and with rosate oil, until the abscess is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put an ointment on the bedside table, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a cloth around it, and bind on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, as long as nothing is defending it, or if the bone is not loosened.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint on the bedside table, with two to three inches of space between each splint, and have each splint be so large that it passes over the bedside table three inches from each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the bedside table, more firmly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settling of stars and the straining, as we said, in the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it be tied until the seventh day, as we said; then look at each three days to see that no swelling or inflammation comes to the place, nor can new growth come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it addresses itself, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come to it, then do not remove the bandage for more than three days or longer, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place under the shoulder one clean linen cloth evenly, and look at each hour of the day or night to see that the shape of the broken member does not move or become loosened the bandages; if it addresses itself by the virtue of medicine, and give him food as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is suitable for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be rewrapped in forty days from the start; and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointment-based medications to bring the limb into alignment.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and congested, it should be loosened in one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breakage of the arm.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicles", because one is small and is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little toe; by chance, break only the large fossicle, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and healing is easy; and when great bones are broken, then healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bones that are broken, then one should slightly extend and align them.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the great bones that are broken, then one should strain them more strongly; and stretch above one cushion, and hold the little pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, so that the patient is crossed over himself, with one cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arms to the part below his hand, or to the joint, and another attendant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is none that are loose and can be grasped by the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint of wood and bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the treatment swelling abscesses occur, then take a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and apply the poultice subtly on top, until the swelling abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the poultice, and put the emplasting made from miller's powder with a great deal of egg white; afterwards, apply the stars, and let one star be slightly stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six stars or arms in various dispositions: whether the breakage is in one bone, or two; and strain more strongly above the breakage than anywhere else, always lessening as we said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the drapes which are on top of the breakage be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the fibers, with which it is strained, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accidents come to the member, as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itchings are assuaged; and let the member not too tightly rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the stretching, and if the ligament is softened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and let it rest thus for some days, until numbness comes to it and then bind.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or around there, then tie the hands to his neck, and let his necks be equal, and take care of movement and wandering, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers it often happens to break, and there is no more than it bends many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of himself evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended cloth, stretches the broken bones, and makes them equal to the mirrors, until they are well joined; and applies an ointment and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then it is applied with a straw according to the quantity of the injury; and it should be enveloped in one fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the belly of the finger, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the bandage be as smooth as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the tip, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another underneath in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it entirely around the hand, and stop the swelling between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it's the middle one, make it equal, as is necessary; and bind it with the finger, and if you see that it needs a small straight bandage to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is on other fingers, such as the index or another, make it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie all together in one holding, whichever is better, or place a bandage above, like a poultice; and take care in restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and help those that come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each of his assistants to his equal part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the crotch, so that one of the strings points towards the fingernail, and the other strings below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and then be the strings below the knee, and be the extension downward; then put the splint on the bone with both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice and the bandage, lest apostemes do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap above the break with a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove any superfluities; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the crotch and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the crotch with the bandage, then set on the break stays, and set one stay on the bone of the leg; then place the strap eight times between the leg and the crotch, soft drapery to put equal pressure; then begin to tie strongly three or four turns around the break; and when you go up above the break, and loosen the strain; then take back to the bottom at the end of the thread, until you come down below the foot; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, lest an aposteme or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is a complication, then release it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, then it is necessary to sew, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to split the skin, and draw out the fragments; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the thigh broken in such a way that one puts bandages on it, as in the aid and arm; although, in the restoration made in this way, the patient does not complain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the various conditions of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the rupture of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Knows that in the hollow of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is only a fissure, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one makes equal what is out of joint in his fingers, until it is assembled as much as one can; then apply an ointment, and put on a round bandage if you need to, and bind it as it is necessary, then return all the dispositions that we have said for other breaks, such as hot abscesses and any similar thing; and give each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Knows that in the leg there are two bones, and for this one is called "tibia" and the other is called "fascia"; and it has all kinds of breakage as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is equal to that of the arm; and the work is complete. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then bend forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer an extension, and set it equal, and bind the splints equally; but always, if the break is ugly and there are multiple pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of leather that go around the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some people put a stick along the length of the leg, made of leather, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is needed in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is hot abscess or any other accident; and care for it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Of the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and one must take care, and there is only a slight wound in more than one disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones mounting one on top of another, then set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they were going to walk, and now put your foot on their joint where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places; then apply plaster and bandages, and under the foot of the patient a small tablet at two full cups, then strain the foot correctly, and when you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, then set them in place, just as we have said for the fingers; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then put under the foot that tablet which I mentioned, and strain it correctly; and if there are two or three or more broken toes, put on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the tablet under the foot; and let it be so that what is above the top of the tablet is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, when we have spoken; and each accident should be treated according to what is needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the thumb is broken, or that of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hand; and these breaks are not concealed from him who puts his study and use there and attends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in many dispositions the right way of restoration: heed this, then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose gizzard and put it inside; then wrap cloths around it, and let it be for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great or small, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they should be healed now, so that the healings which we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but the breakage remains, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the breakage in the same hour or day, unless abscesses do not come forth.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come forth, then leave the restoration alone until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for you to put in place with your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them, according to what they have need of in each cure of breakage; and be rough and a little big, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be flat in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved bone should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and bind it once, until it renews itself, and be even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you should shape the top of the bone until the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then file it with a suitable instrument, or knife or rasp, to your power; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black stiptic wine, and make sure it is properly applied; and do not put on the wound cerote or any other thing where there is oil, lest you cause rot and corruption; then administer them when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and they have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at times; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil events may happen, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put on poultices; but wrap around, instead of poultices, hard cloths and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the bowing of the wound, then take away what you have put on all wine, and put salve for healing wounds, as salve tetrachloromethane and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can run down easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but goes back down, know that there are small bones, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose fragments that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter here before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar great members, do not pull it, for many times death ensues, but leave it so that it can heal; by chance it will fall off after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come on the sweat glands
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see after the healing of an incision, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to behold the shape of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore if the swelling is fresh: then administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aloe, and similar others, either one of these things or all together, and boil them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and start another, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it over a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of the cloth are that they remove all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you give it to any scraper, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and after the member remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or because of excess inflammation; or because of excessive movements, not in its proper hour; or because it has a lack of blood in its body, thus it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and keep the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and ease to him; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and removes excess moisture often with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish men have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then they should be removed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be cooked, such as yarrow leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, like well-made daquylon, and take the sap of yarrow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take figs that are rich in grease, and grind them with henbane, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is removed by continuous and long rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there should be gentle movement to the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and calcified, like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut just to the bone, at the incision, subtlety lightly; and put caution and study into the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring it back into place carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the swelling will grow, and by chance, if it is reset with points at the swollen place; therefore, it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times this brings on shame and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient sicker, then leave them, until the abscess has been calmed; then arise the member in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each member as its cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jawbones are dislocated downward, and the dislocation of both is in two manners: or they are a little removed from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you should reset it quickly, and don't delay; and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put the mirror's sponge into one of their hands in the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two-parted; and the other two hands be elsewhere, to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax his jaw, and move it from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the attendants put it in its place, until it returns to its natural position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not hesitate in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Et when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is closed well with a sense of softening, so put damp cloths on it in a poultice made from rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft strings; and the patient sleeps on their back, with their legs being supported by two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to speak, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are set; and then he can eat what he wants lightly, and does not trouble himself about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jawbone is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps dissolution of the bowels, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many times the person who has it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of it and the breastbone, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can well perceive this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies so often on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly into one's palm, and it will return; then puts on the poultice and bandage, and tightens it; and the shoulder that was dislocated from the cut cannot be relocated; unless not, and if it relocates at any time, then resets it to its place, as we have said; then puts on the poultice and bandage, and tightens it, and instructs the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus is brought back the shoulder of the scapula, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: namely, it dislocates at the lower part of the arm bone downward; and also at the part of the back bone; and by chance it dislocates upward, and this happens rarely; and does not dislocate backward for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and it dislocates often downward toward the arm bone, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it springs forth quickly; in those who have sufficient flesh, it springs forth slowly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps happens to some men a blow or breaking, and the shoulder becomes swollen with an abscess hot, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known when the dislocation is downward toward the arm bone, and you will find difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest diversity; and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and beneath the arm bone, as if it were an ox's yoke; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck or move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can find it manifestly at the touch; and this type of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new, unless the child is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fists under the armpit, and lifts the jointure with force up to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it up high, then puts it back down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the assistant should arise gradually soothing and calming, like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and should assist; then the patient should be placed on their back, and a woolen pad equal in thickness neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath, and the mirror should be placed at the patient's heel beneath the pad, and lift the top of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand; and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that they do not move down; that shoulder comes back now, and if you see it come back in this manner: and it is that you make someone who is greater than the patient present; and stand facing the opposite side, and push the patient's shoulder underneath the pad of the patient, and lift the pad high so that the patient hangs in the air; and another assistant should pull the patient's hand down towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so let him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one should also do it in another way: and this is how you place a long iron spike in the ground, so that the head of the dislocation is as steady as a piston, and neither too big nor too small; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient's hand should rest on the length of wood; then stretch their hand down to the other side in this form, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take an iron spike from two arms wide and four fingers long, which has a pointed head so as to easily enter into a hollow under the shoulder blade, in this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it on top of the bent head of the stick with a soft cloth so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch one's arm over the long iron rod, and tie the assistant to the iron rod, and lift one's arm up to the top of the hand, then put one's arm on top of a small shield from a wide basket, and let one's hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the jointure will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit a woolen sphere, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all of the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the armpit gently, and turn the bandage over the poultice, and encircle the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little, until the limbs are comforted, for he will heal sooner; and then drink more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is moved out of its place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you must administer fire cauterizations in three places, as is written before this chapter on fire cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it happens after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift your arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the chest and breasts or the back is caused by sudden impulse and stretching of arms, and another treatment should be applied; and cure until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the hip
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the hip is displaced a little bit, and then returns a little bit; and it is displaced from all sides, just as well in front as behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and displace according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the wounded limb with sound, then it can be seen openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as apostemes come to it, for if apostemes came to it, it would be grievous to reset; and in any case it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is at the back; and it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and in any case death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you stretch out its hand to your two hands; and its arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the hip around, above, and below, and push the joint back into place with its folds together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and brings back the hip that is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and this is done by having two assistants extend the arm, and hold it steady with their hands, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in each direction, once you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it; and when the surgeon has joined the joint to her hand, she will anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is back in place, apply dry plaster with some egg, and hold it firmly, and suspend the arm from the patient's neck, and let it be for several days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels grief after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and stroke him gently, and press until he is soothed; or you put wool fat on the jointure, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, then stroke the jointure temperately, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that, then put wet warm hay of marsh mallow on it and press it down.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated and the return is light, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place hastily, in the same hour that it is dislocated, whether the swelling be present or an apostema hot come.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of your hand, and make the mirror equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and holds it until it recovers. Nevertheless, it is necessary for you to look if it is well in place; then put the patient's hand with its back on a table at stretching and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their back hand on the table, and the doctor puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; if not, then the straining of soothing poultices on abscesses will calm it down, and leave it so that it does not start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and nothing can harm the patient more than when his hand is numb, and he cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; so there is no other remedy except to strain by fire cautery in the case, and perchance it is not worth another thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster as we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it gently until he is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the two bones of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist; then the bones are separated, and push the dislocation into your pouches as far as it will go, then hold the head of the bone and guide it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it two days, and then put it even on that day; and bind with a cloth, as we have said, and loosen for a day, and make it move, and bind again to the nut; and do this often until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do just as you have done before until it is sound; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Loosening of the spine's curvature
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the curvature of the back or neck is loosened, or there are multiple loosenings, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that bowel movements jump forth without will, nor can they be held, and many times some member becomes soft, either one or two breasts or two arms or one leg; and sometimes the shinbone moves into four parts; that which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you should take note if gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no care nor healing for it all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the old methods of cures by great words say it is not at all in great benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in gilbositis which comes to the breast before, there is no sense nor health; and also that which comes straightly on both sides, and one can only cure those properly which come on the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have a strain beneath him, so he does not get hurt; then place one brick at the head on the ground firmly, and another between the legs of the patient, and tie a cord below the armpits of the patient, and another to the hips, and ankles, and shins; and two attendants know how to tie the cords, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two bricks; and be well closed, the brick as we have said, and the mirrors put their palms on the spine firmly, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a piece of three-armed wood, carve a hole in the middle part, and the patient should be on the side, and push the head of the piece under the skin; then put the middle of the piece on the spine; and place the fingers of the one on the other head of the piece, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it turn in the direction that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And that you place two spits at the head of the patient, one arm long and towards the feet, and between each spit, an elbow-length space; and in each spit, one hole or where the turning occurs, and let the spits be firmly on the ground so they do not move; and between the two spits, one spit turns, as the cord turns, and have in both turnings two small spits of an arm's length to turn the turner; and then tie the cord that is among the assembles at the turner towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet at the other turner, and each of the servants makes his turner turn all along the cord, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except through dislocation alone, nor does it come forth as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is loosened according to three parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more so within than without, and less loosened before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of his dislocation is this: when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more prominent, and the sick person's knee is higher than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee at the fire; and there is swelling below the abscess, because the hip bone comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in the back is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well straightened according to its completion; however, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot at first, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the knee is at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you correct if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no treatment; and one should not have any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three manners of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, and straighten it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you should make the assistant strong, and steady the leg firmly with two hands, or with a strap that is tied above the knee; and another assistant stretches his hand above in such a manner that he thrusts his hands under his armpits, then tightens them with a soft ligament above the hip; and another person holds the head of the ligament; and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to apply a remedy to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is necessary that you strengthen the patient on their healthy side, then place the ligament on the root of the hollow, and the part that is below the angle, then set the ligament high towards the angle, and towards the fortress; then take other assistants' arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick joint, and stretch it outwardly strongly: thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot compress it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligament on both heels, and on both knees, and let the sick leg be stretched two fingers more than the others; then hang it from the head of a tree, and be above the earth two arms long; then command one assistant to embrace the head of the joint, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who compresses the joint strongly, for the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, so lie the patient, as we have said in that who has gilbositeit, and strain I the linen on the sick leg properly, and on the breast also; then put II tisons, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick I tison between the hips of the ailing person in the middle; and be planted with damp cloths around, so that it does not hurt the patient, then stretch each servant towards him, and the mirror place equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the .ie. table, and press it thus as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I said; and have the surgeon place his hand on the armpit of the patient's affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not good to stretch the patient down or lift him up on the earth, but it should be as if his hips were dislocated at the back, as we have said about the couching of the two hips; and he should lie on his face, and the linen extended as we have said before, and one must press on the jointure at the table; and it will be just right when the patient stretches out his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the hips, and put the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and if he rests for three or four days, then loosen him, and put the poultice on; and if you see they are equal, then stretch again, as before, and leave him for three days; then loosen him, and let him go smoothly, until the member is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and forward, and backward; and it does not dislocate ahead.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et li signes si est that thou commandest the patient to bend his leg unto his hip, and if it doth not adjust unto his hip, know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that thou makest the patient sit upright, and stretcheth forth his leg if he can, and place thy back upon his face, and set his foot upon thine; then take hold of his knee with thy hands, and draw it between thy thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and another attendant stretcheth out his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he hath adjusted his leg unto his hip slightly; and apply the plaster thereupon, and make the leg adjust unto the hip, and bind it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient to walk, until the members be consoled.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not in place, so administer extension strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes strained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tend towards the part where it is dislocated; the repositioning is gentle, and one should stretch it gently with their hands when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully repositioned, you should have the patient sit straight, and hold the minister away from the leg above the ankle; then bring the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards well; and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and stretching the foot; if it comes back, that's good; if not, you should begin the work again, because it will come back; and if it can't come back in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a strap firmly on the ground between his thighs, and tie cloth around, so the patient doesn't get hurt; then hold the minister to the thigh, and another minister stretches the foot to their hands or to a rope that they tie above the ankle of the foot; then stretch each minister evenly, and the straps should be there between the patient's thighs to retain the patient when you're stretching; then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation in your hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	Et quant elle iert a point, so met the plaster and bandages on it, and tighten them firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, lest the binding be too tight; then let it stay for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, retighten it; then release it at the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not relapse again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears there, then it is necessary to pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two bones are dislocated, then they should be gently stretched without labor, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a one-foot table exactly straight, and put your foot on what appears to be these joints; then press firmly with your foot until it returns; and when it is even, and there appears nothing, place a two-inch board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and let it stay for three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: if you are not non-presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and you are pitiful and merciful and tardy, nor bold; and use gentle things first on abscesses hot, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset now the member to its place, so that the abscess grows cold again; and when the members are at their place, then administer gentle things to abscesses hot, and cure the wound as it is fitting, with drying ointments; and if with dislocation there is a break, and small bones separated, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be moved according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and body.
Amen	Alright is done.
