O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it according to his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and estranged from all, so the science has perished and been decapitated, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are shut down, and knowledge is being alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I should bring it back to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools of work along with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for use, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to climb up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the muscles and veins, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that the name without work is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said, beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have seen many of those who undertake this science abandon their science and lack experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut away an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat it, and saw the patient's condition and the largeness of the stone, and knew well that they were going to die from it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took on the care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the break he had an open wound; and the ignorant surgeon stretched the break over the wound so tightly that it was held fast by strong bandage, and did not leave any room for healing, and thus left it to be finished; and he commanded him not to remove it at all; and thus it remained until the leg became inflamed and the feet came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the same, the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and could not be healed; and the corrosion did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst an inflamed abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is free from melancholic humor, it does not agree that one should touch it with iron unless it is in such a place where all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of any bad illness unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicine cauterization, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and cauterizing instruments, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, so that we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and hidden reply; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, the hot and dry complexion with matter, and the dry and cold complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry complexion with matter, some have divided their opinion and said that cauterization is great aid; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization does not help with diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with hot disease by heat or dryness; and that man who said the opposite says that cauterization does great aid to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on some occasions through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Et toute voie, not venture at all unless it is by him who has tried it, and who knows through long usage the book of cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the chances and the pace of time; from other temperaments we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the surgeons assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is applied to the part that is burned, and does no harm to another member if it be named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from one member to another, and bring diseases of great harm to the afflicted limb; and by chance, the patient does not suffer thus if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this for you through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself from the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is related to fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say in demonstrating; or accept it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauteries should be done and selected patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is mitigated by the aid of the cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think this, dear son, as foolish surgeons do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so, but it is not as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste and value of its work and sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may come at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered in a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for denseness for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish surgeons.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with an instrument of gold is more effective than one of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of the gold and its excellence in substance; and they said that the location of the cautery does not make a difference, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true for some people; and cauterization with gold is worth more than one of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it has soon cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they burn themselves; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use iron cauterization because we have found it to be suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more light and easy to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive-cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is worth for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of multitude of dreams and pain of denseness and pain of the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can withstand; and then make the patient's head clean.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands on his shoulders; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your fingers go where they may, so that it bleeds a little, and then cauterize the "olivare" cautery, whose form is this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make your hand move gently up and down in a twisting motion; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see bone 1/4 inch small; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do see it as I told you; after that, take 1/4 of a thread, and place it in a soft and wet cotton cloth inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for 3 days; after that, apply moistened linen to the wound, and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, cure the ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more thoroughly; and therefore it is more effective.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should cauterize so much above, and push it so hard that the bone is worn away as wide as a vertebra that women put in their corsets because the humors are moved outwards; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one should cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every case, except for some people who have a predisposition to fear; and it seems to me that I should abandon it; for the joints are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and likewise when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and purging for me, and this is what I use with great success.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts a long time, then the patient should use year's balm and pills that are called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and it is not too cold; then cauterize under that same cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After, make a cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have previously mentioned, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and is one place where one puts poultices; and hold your hand so that you do not see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and that's the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease spreads all the way to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, namely medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine cauterization is when you take a dose of aloes, remove the rind and repackage it into one pot as two heads, then make a temple incision where the pain stays in such a way that you can put the dose of aloes under the skin; and when it has been replaced, secure it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; then release it and let the wound be like that for two or three days; then put a poultice on with butter until purpura appears.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment cure, until it is healed; and if you see that this is done with some burning medicines that I have written or in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery to its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or if there is one small piece of charcoal, and in it, there is a small appearance; and you put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the esparto of the key is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and pour out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After, put cotton in awe of silk, and put it on the spot for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and take care not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that neither the medicine nor fire cautery before mentioned is sufficient, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign over the painful spot a line half an inch long, and once remove your hand, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and come right up to the bone; and take care of the jawbone which moves when eating, and the nerves have regard for the movement and that spasm does not occur in the patient; and take care also of the bleeding of blood from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in one who has not studied and experienced; and let the work go in my way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which has the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot to be treated; and have 10 pricks around each ear; then cure the spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make any cauterization on similar things that come from heat and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similar torture that moves from phlegm of idres and espurgements of the head and gargarism, and it doesn't help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery near the head of the ear above a small piece below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery so that half of the esparto of the key is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the same shape as the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little thicker; after, cure the spot just as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured just as we have said before.
de litargie	from lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	to this illness it is fitting to give the patient great years and powders that are beneficial for the brain; after, rinse the chief of the patient thoroughly, and place the poultice of mustard on the back of the head as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it just as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom as far as the collarbone, leaving a space of two inches between each one; and cure it just as the others, and if you see that it is swollen or the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until he is well; and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be such as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be cleansed with years and with what we have said before; after, rinse the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the boil is burned away, and lift your hand; after, cure until he is well, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be such as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a cautery unless they are suffering from phlegmatic humor, and it is fitting to cleanse the brain with years and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering greatly from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer it, make him gargle and chew on something that will cleanse the brain often with good meat; after, rinse the head in the middle, and make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the nape, and on each horn; and if the patient is spreading and suffering greatly, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be an olive cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the superfluities or moisteries are corrupted and become thick phlegm, then make the same type of cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After rinse the head of the patient; after make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and let the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides; after present the liniment, and anoint with butter from ancient burdock; and heat it over moderate fire, so that the patient can bear to have it poured in; after empty the circle within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for each time with good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you want to cauterize, do it by making several points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cauterization moistens the brain adequately; and then put on a wet cloth with goose fat and butter.
de l’awe des eulz	of the water of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When water comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that will cleanse the head, and watch over all moisteries, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instruct the patient to put his head back, and make a cautery in the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the watery discharge is from both eyes together, or from one; and close all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and watch out for bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the bleeding with a cloth as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incisions, how to stop bleeding; and never make a cautery or hatterel under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears of the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the watery discharge flowing to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or haterel under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize sagitally above the forehead on each small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears of the body within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three cocked nuts to drink; after rinse the head, and make a cautery on the middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavilis" on each temple, a little below the eyebrows; and watch out for the artery so you don't cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this iron which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	why this form exists:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you should make two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hair of the eyebrows is converted to pus, and points at the oil, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or cauterization by fire commands the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible; and if they point at their birth, then restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in their right mind; afterwards draw a line on the paper of the eyes like that of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then place moistened cotton in egg yolk and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, cauterize on the figure that you have signed slowly and gradually many times, so that the burns are gone from there; and the sign of health is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burning sensation is removed; afterwards, apply ointment treatment until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicine's burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient is holding in only one eye, then work on that one alone, and if in both alike; and place moistened cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in a state of well-being and you should show your two fingers on top of the medicine, and press once or twice each time the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for they feel it as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done that for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting is past, then lift up the lead of awe, and warn yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then put more medicine on the lead or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are set in place; then put on wet cotton in a ball until the ardent heat is gone, after curing the lead of the anointing which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must be well warned about your work by great warning that the medicine does not harm the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hairs prick in the eye, then resume the medicine on that lead which has been softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after curing until it is healed; and this is the form of the fire of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this be your constructions; and do not assume the right way for one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Note: The text seems to be a continuation of the previous treatise on medicine.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make him undergo a fire treatment in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and hold the men's hands on his head between yours in this manner that it does not move, nor will he leave his head; after put a moist cloth in the yolk of an egg or in the juice of persimmon on the eye; after heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it to the head as if it were the form of a vulture's feather, together with the queil being the cautery; if you see, it should be appointed from one head to another, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but nevertheless, this one that is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and take away the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and remove far the bowels; after put hotly upon the cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery just up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again once, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; after that put a moistened cotton poultice in butter, and apply the drying ointment until he is healed, and if forty days pass and he is not healed, put on corrosive medicine so that the bone is exposed; and then follow according to what comes into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of fire cautery for a fistula that none of the ancient ones said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	You understand a fistula, and make an incision in it; after that put into the opening one small piece of camphor, the shape of which is:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make it to the quantity of three pints of wax; and hold your hand with camphor firmly, and do not let the patient move until the melted wax flows to his eye; and it is necessary that you put a moist cloth on the eye for the patient in the yolk of eggs or in ale: the wax soaks up the seat of the fistula, and heals it by wondrous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the fire cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the newborn, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the newborn according to what is fitting.
des crevaices en levres	Cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often happen cracks in the lips which are called "fuzz", and likewise in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cauterizing cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it hastily into those cracks so that it comes just up to the front; after treat the lip with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it becomes putrid and rots and is filled with pus and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after heat or boil the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes red at the front of the bone, and at the back; and do this once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery whose form will come next in this manner that you put a string on the tooth; and put hotly inside the cautery hastily, and hold your hand so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with salted ale, and let it stay an hour and then vomit.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or there is cold or heat, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to make a cautery in two ways: and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterizing with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape it into a spoon of iron or earthenware; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on a hot iron until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery together with fire is such that you take a piece of iron or earth, and it should be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, because the form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the impression of that cautery, and then washes out the form; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterizing with the queue that you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the chain:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulae are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery until the form comes forth, and have two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and wrap in moistened cotton soaked in butter until the inflammation is removed; afterwards treat with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails on the channels of the womb, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after which do the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, nor burn with fire but just slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After which do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery that is called "clavile", as we have shown the form before; and care for the place so that it is healed, just as we have said before, until it is sound.
de la toust	of the breast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the womb are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and is the disease old, then make two cauteries on the belly in visible areas; and one other cautery between the breasts among the two nipples; and it should be called "clavicle" according to the form said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do a cautery in piercing to all the points that are called "points", as we have shown the form before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing it according to what is said beforehand, and let the cauterization be at three inches according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are the cauteries lighter because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After be sure the patient on his back and on his side; after lift the skin that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two handles like this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the skin as far as the side, and the bleeding from the cautery comes together with three cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined above one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery a poultice with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little good happens then, so make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized nail, or many cauterizations that are pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach to its complexion, and many cathartics are multiplied for him, and the usual cures do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make three cauterizations one below the other in the depth of a thumb's width down to the cauterized nail, and two cauterizations on each side so that the figures of the cauterizations are at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they move towards putridity; and let the cauterization be so deep that it penetrates both parts of the gallbladder, and let the figure of the cauterization be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a great fire cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see increasing; then cauterize all the burning area which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, as long as it is heavily troubled by its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, but it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on his haunches; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, above the hypochondria, where the skin of the human comes; and leave a space between each cautery the size of an egg; and the cauterizations should be long as far as the body reaches, and do not press your hand all over the cautery; and burn only half of the kernel, and have the patient stand straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then have him sit, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms; and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	Et if thy will is, then cauterize these cauteries with the cutlery, if thou art subtle and wise in the art, and beware that thou dost not burn all the skin, for thou wouldst dry out all the body; and let it not come just to boil, for the skins are very delicate thereabout, and thou knowest truly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has an abscess on the liver, and thou wishest to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, then he feels unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure was done by the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his head; and then sign above the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterer which is similar to a ray, because of which there is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautery so that the burns be consumed, and come to a blister, until the inflammation is completely gone; afterwards according to the cure of the wounds as long as they are healed; and it does not concern that anyone other than he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine uses this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pectoral cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should make pectoral cauteries with Aristolochia roots, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the breast and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below on the part that is under the beard; and two cauteres between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and one on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast, after the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it appear openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And certain old men said that someone should use a fire cautery similar to a razor, heat it and put it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and soon the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mule
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mule according to what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I place the two puffed-up nerves so that the key is perceived from the other side, and then remove the fire cautery, thus there will be four. If you see, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has brought forth purulence by long time, and this is worth more than the other cures previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work on a dropsical person, except by the method which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauterizations be well near the spot where the key fits.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open to let it heal for a long time, and do not cease the care of the patient after the cautery; and salvation will hasten, and there will be together the two intentions with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the same as the one we have shown before, and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was said earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen to one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and index finger; and lift up your hand with the cautery as if turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in, thus the yellowish pus would burst forth, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make two cauteries on each leg, one at the tip of the little toe and one behind the knee, on the inside of the leg; and let the cauteries be long, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time until the moisture subsides; after cure with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient suffering badly and with great virtue, if make one great cautery on the stomach according to what is spoken here before or the cautery of the stomach, to the circulatory cautery; and three subtle cauterizations around the mouth, each a small, subtle cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each toe, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the ulcers are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and made of thick, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that one which is entirely below the almond-shaped prominence and pokes and pokes in a triangular way, and one cauterization under the jawbone, two fingers' breadth; and if you think that his stomach has grown cold, and the food does not cook, and the face begins to puff up, then on the face make a large cauterization on the stomach, as is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the belly at all the cauterized part; and leave the cauterizer open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure let the limb remain until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, if it seems like a razor, then put the cautery all ablaze on that thelul cut; and I leave it for as long as the cauterizations come to the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments that are beneficial until they are sound; and if you make a great cautery on the alchatim, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an ill-cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that it cannot be healed unless by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an abscess forms and is swollen and discharges pus and corrupt moistrures, then you must examine the entire tent and know exactly how deep it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After reheat the cautery that seems razor-sharp, and insert it into the abscess according to the amount that the tent has entered, and continue the cautery until all corrupt flesh is burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the quantity of what needs to be done; and beware of burning the nerve that is nearby, and from great wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the abscess goes to the bladder and intestine, then beware of these places, and do not make any fires except on solid ground, and think that they are not yet passed through; after the cure let the limb remain until it is healed, and if the swelling subsides and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the swelling is entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the swelling is torn, and corrupts the bone at its root; and thus as one of those things which we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys and great windiness, and does not take a feminine shape, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the subtle cautery that we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part in front of the bladder, where the hair of the wrist begins, and one to the right and one to the left, and each of them be as long as the length of a finger; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauterizations be subtle according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations are late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that three cauterizations be made around the mouth, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be subtle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the hip of the hainche, and because of this the patient's limb is moved from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the patient has a departure in the region of the hips, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the hainche with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the limb around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olive, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the veins; and cure until it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip of the hainche, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize above the buttock bone three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery the width of an elbow, and be the cauteries oval; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle above the chief of the buttock bone, why there are four according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip and all the tendons of the knee are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the buttock and does not reach as far as the thigh nor as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, then you make two cauteries on either side where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four fingerbreadths to the left; and be the cauteries cutellate, and let the burning be done in the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the toes or almost there, then you cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary is, make him have more; and if it seems that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cauterization until you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say about the fire cautery of the flank, how it is done, make such a rod and be as wide as an egg of dactyl or a little less, and be between the ribs and be from one rib to another in the quantity of a walnut; and be the ribs apart two parts, and also like hazelnuts, and it must be well made with iron; and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles,
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this fire cautery because of the fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it; and nonetheless, it is one of the good cauteries that can suffer it, and the place where it afflicts.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cauteries of medicine are such that you make an instrument with notches in which the edges descend below the door frame, and it is made of earth or iron to a length of one palm, and on the top have two noses, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a dove; and they be open at the front and back, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put the pommel of the haunch on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then place your hand right over the pommel of the haunch; after that pour hot water between the two circles of the awn which is heated by fire one pot, and let it stay for an hour or a tenth, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burning of him.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds a similar mordication as fire; and when the mordications are passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the haunch of sweet water, and let it stay thus three days, and put on butter until what is black from scabbing is removed; and after three days that putrefaction ceases; and this would be the last aid after the cure of ointments as long as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that holds heat according to what you have done in a similar way in the groin; and this is the method of hot treatment, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and live heat, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or there is a small hole to drain what the point of a razor can enter; and put it into another pot well weighted, and put sweet heat on top, as long as there are two powders above which you will have well prepared in your hand; and leave it thus until the heat descends and becomes water or fluid in the weighed pot, then take all that heat and pour it on charcoal and alkaline just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very helpful and administered in the movements of medical works and in other members' cauterizations. For it performs a work like fire, and also with other medicines that one well cures the flesh thus as thesis and honeyed anacardium and chalices with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his flesh and sciatic vein, and greatly praised it, and said that no other cure was done to him, and he was healed only once when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself just as it is instructed here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in the same way that you take green litargire and make it very fine with a little bit of grease, and put it on the flesh, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it there for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the heat anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed up, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fire, it helps a lot; and one should make the cauterizations in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take flax and soak it in old oil, and place it on the fossa that is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called fascia.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that take goat's fire when it is dry, and put it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the flax, and let it stay until it cools down; and do it again like this, and don't stop doing it like this as long as you think with your senses that it will reach the hunch and that the pain will cease; and this manner of cauterization is called "goat's fire".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or striking or from too great evacuation or from similar things spread cold matter, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary afterwards that the patient be freed from fetid pills or other similar things, and one should place them on their back, where the pain stays, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line .v. cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and the cauterization should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make iij. cauterizations or iiij. at the clavicle median according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow back when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last part of the spine of the back and in no other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it curing, then cauterize it at the cautery of celery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery reaches every part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire that is piercing 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, leave it so long as it is sound according to what we have said, and take care not to apply cauterization in a hollow spot where there is a swelling of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain in the joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the barber calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make many cauteries around the jointure of the foot, and be the cauteries olive-like according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make the cauterization all over with the fire that we call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make cauterization on each knee 3 or 4 times for every part, all over the olivary; and if you need more, do it more, but do not keep your hand there any longer than until the fat of the cheek is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make punctures around the joint for two lines; and if there remains no pain to the arm, then make punctures above each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the sides, then cauterize each part, and perform good governance with the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the scab
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When scurvy comes in sores, and the boils descend to the groin and it's new, then it is necessary that when you see it curing, that he does not move at all on that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the phlegm descends from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his backbone until the boil is repaired, and bring them down to your knees, and mark an incision below the scurvy on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to the middle of a circle above the body; then cauterize it according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is pale and emits sweat.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reposition the bones to their place; and hold his hand firmly so that he does not return to that place; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the hips, and another under the breast holding his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again as many times as necessary until you reach the bone; and be careful subtly so that the bones do not shift when you do the cautery; lest you burn him; and lest the patient die or receive other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the fire cautery, your efforts are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to their size, and those of great people also great according to their size; after three days, care for the wound at the site of the burning until the scabbing is removed; afterwards, care for other ointments until they are healed, and the patient lies on his back for 40 days with a cushion so that the wound may be well closed; and it is necessary that their bandages be worn long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he will go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, let a well-made bandage be given to him, and wear it for another 40 days; and may he have good rest, so that he does not trouble himself too much and take care not to eat or drink too much and shout too loudly; and when he has done this instruction, then he is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the scurvy of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, then one should make the fire cautery of the fire again according to its quantity, and let it be burned the third time by the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and any of the ancients have said that one must cauterize at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of entrance and make a line above the ulcer for its width, and another below it, and with your hand guide all the cautery through.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more tender.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pains in any member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauterization be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twistings and pains.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's well; if not, begin another cauterization on that one, for such a habit is that it must change to the member that is closest, therefore you should make cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	surgeonry
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are helped sometimes by cauterization with great help, and similarly the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see it being cauterized, take care if the sickness is at its beginning, and if it's cured according to what we said in the division, and don't let it spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption will overwhelm the whole patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: I in the middle of the head about nine inches, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the hinder part; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cauterize on the mole according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the surgeonship is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries on the head, and one cautery in the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the scapula and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back, so you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more it helps and produces profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as much as the healthy person feels, because the body is already too corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, dress with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and he is not yet healed, then make a cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be slightly entering into the flesh of the skin; then cure it with ointments until he is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one makes a fire cautery on the arm and foot and back at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is removed the swelling; and yet no one intervenes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and exits of nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worth nothing, then cauterize it with one cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the flesh of the knee, until the pus is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of vetches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of calf and blood of almond, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure of chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre comes at the beginning and you wish to arrest it, then cauterize around the perimeter of the circle with the fire that seems like a ring, entirely around the tour of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and yet it does not seem to me good, for I fear that it would be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen sometimes; and it is a more direct thing that it be cauterized around, with the fire called "circule", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays death or due to the superfluity that it causes or because of the old age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the weather; and you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize it with many small cauterizations while it pricks; afterwards leave it so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten its dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery so that its form is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauterizations have pierced the furrow, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in just such a way that the flow of pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterward care for it until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a gangrene of the member, for it consumes the members just as fire dries out dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in the place that can suffer a fire cautery together, then sharpen the cauters little and great, according to what is needed for the place where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you root out all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupt be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice that suffers with oil until the burn marks of fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments generates flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy has been sometimes used in place of fire cauterization by medicinal treatment; but nevertheless fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said the cure by medicinal treatment in the division: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Mout de fois avient que as piez par defours naist une maladie qui est apelee "clos" selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose faultree qui blece le pied.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to know fire cauterization and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the cautery iron like a blacksmith's pen, and make it of good steel to its measure so that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and have subtle edges; then put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to suppurate; then apply a poultice made of wild marjoram bruised with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with ointment, anointing it until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by external wounds to the body, and many times occur on hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply water cauterization; and do so: take a linen cord or iron, or a quill of vetch, and place it on the claw and nail, that is, pimpled veins; and place the cord around so that it envelops everything completely, then put in a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the cord comes to the root of the claw, and thus the hot water can find its way deep to the root; and allow the patient a little time for the burning of the hot water one hour; then leave it like this, and he will come loose from all his roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So that you can do one after another, as long as you have reached all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds which cause flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from coldness or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make .iiii. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the weight, and one on the stomach at the olivaire cautery; if the trembling ceases, and the health of the cold disease hastens.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time appears by foreknowledge to know when the cleansed body, or foul boils, that come from corrupted great matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first when they appear to make a fire cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization made from myrtle wood, by which the point is seized by fire, or from a long aristologe root, or a lentil-shaped cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no time should cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further ahead, but the superfluous parts that come from it are broken off, and they heal; but it is necessary for this to be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at a cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tightly until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more flows; then apply fire to the olivaire cauteries, many small and large ones, until they are all red; then take one, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stemmed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to apply these one after another until the blood is stemmed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stem it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stem blood; and let it be bound and restrained in a good manner.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever attempts to stem the bleeding by binding tightly with cloths or applying hot things on top, or other similar things, if it does not help at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press tightly until it is stemmed above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often while it is very cold, so that the blood may congeal and thicken and be stemmed; and make a way forward for those things which he needs, such as cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the causes and symptoms and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter on the head until the end, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way for those things which one wishes to find more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come into cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so afflicted with their disease that they will die quickly due to the severity of their illness and the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these is one who gives you his sense, and says: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your patients for the sake of their salvation; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and a memorial of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear friend, May Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ended this chapter by describing it in chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have described from head to foot, so that you may find more easily those things which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of pure water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often befalls children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died suddenly; and for this reason it seems to me that it is not worth bothering with such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew thicker every day until it could not be sustained; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed dead, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the operations are such that if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you cut a wide incision in the head; and make it as long as two nails, so that the moisture runs; and look here at the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more thickened and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head opened up on each part, and the liquid jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture forth.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the cuts of cloths and powders, and putting in wine and oil, and leaving thus until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with tenting and anointings, and let the head drain equally, and then let the patient eat dry meat without moisture as long as the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look at or open the great extent of the abscess, and the gathering of the liquid; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the spot where the abscess opens and the liquid accumulates, and let the liquid flow according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and come forth blood, so that the patient may die from the deprivation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheum.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old-fashioned, and the treatment of medicine does not help at all, then the final cure is the fire cauterization with what will be cut off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you cover the views, it is necessary for the patient to make their head go back; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient remove their neck from the entire cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the pulsations of one and the other are after the ears, and they are then repointed; then mark the pulse on the inside, then cut off both with a sharp instrument, two parts deep, until the knife comes to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two should pass through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will jump out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space between III fingers, then sign and fill up just to the bone; and what needs to be done with blood is VI c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the sphac, cut so that apostemes do not come there, then bind the wound and tie, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes and sharp catarra, due to the moistors of tears and heats in temples and old foreskin and similar things, and medicine does not help him by ways of medical treatments and all this does not profit him at all, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back his hair from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little responded forth except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then has the patient hold out his neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the liquid hot until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which is of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then train it upwards at the pincers, and depart well from the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the uncin, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if she is not cut open, then the blood will not flow entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And extract the blood of six cells up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two knots of a strong double silk thread, so that no pus may come forth before the wound has healed and there may be bleeding; then cut off the superfluous part which is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize with the cutaneous cautery up to the bone as far as the hairs are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is aid to finish the moisture: therefore it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one unties them, one must be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and with tents, until he is healed; and if there is no gap in the artery as long as you are working, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or apply the place with vitriol and strain it with your hand until the blood is stopped; and if you do not have that present, then put your finger on the place so that the blood may congeal, and raise the place with cold water so that the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is more main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting knife, but the cutting parts should be well spaced to withstand their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cutting parts are too close together, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have one big gap between the two cutlery, and then when you have marked with ink the two places, and you apply the hot iron on top so that it reaches up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two places; and let them be distant from each other between the two cells, for it is not sealed by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief part of the face, and it does not profit at all from the medicine one makes there, and you see the patient's face redness, and feel the forehead sensation as if from trembling; and thus oil are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papier are fallen, and the papier are heated and scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to perform this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "blunt cure" in olden times; and this is what you do to the patient with this disease: make them have hair on their forehead, then make three incisions on their forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be as big as two fingers inside the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the others two between the eyebrows above the papillae, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are between the eyebrows above the papillae; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jawbones, and make each wound three fingerbreadths across; and have a piece of sponge and many cloths ready in case the blood flows, then apply the poultice in three parts according to its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the fat that is between the two cuts right down to the suture that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	then insert into the first cut the instrument called "culterelle", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not at all sharp, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the scalpel towards the fatty part under the hide, and the edge softened towards the bone, and press until it reaches the main incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears under the hide; and then do the same in the main incision up to the other side; and then draw out equal blood, and express the place where the blood has been taken; then put a cloth of old cotton into each incision, and put damp cloths on it soaked in vinegar, oil, and ashes, and guard that abscesses do not form there; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great quantities of lukewarm water, then apply balm of basil with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with a great and accustomed cataract, and you see the eyes small and tight, and dimming the sight, and the pupils burned; and the hair is falling out, and there is a severe pain in the forehead, and the patient is strangled; then knows by these accidents that those matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the father of medicine who knows it, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to go back his forehead, then make a great cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one about a span wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then place between the two lips of the incision a piece of old cotton and linen; then put wet cloths on it soaked in wine and oil, and take care to prevent hot abscesses; when it is cleansed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with caustic things that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of galenicals, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of three things: or grains, or beasts, or pebbles of stone, or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as ashes, vetches, peas; or flowing things, such as water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it gets into the ear or in any other way that does not join with the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill some violet oil or sesame oil, and then apply extraction; and when the procedure is finished, and the nostrils are stopped when the extraction comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and lift the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times a boil comes forth through this cure; and if it does not come forth, apply extraction with fine forceps, by which the shape is thus formed.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out through the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer an extraction with fine forceps of small double-jawed type; and if it doesn't come out through that, then make a chain of iron and insert the head of the chain or piercing of the ear very tightly, and stop whatever is around the chain from entering with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take a glue from which birds take their nests, and put into some instrument that is pointed for that purpose, and wrap a little cotton around; then press the glue on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut open the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part or dependent part; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the pebble, then remove it as much as you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains that are inside and they're inflamed, then administer an extraction; and if it can't come out, then administer one sharp spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do that when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then draw it out with fine forceps and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then that flows in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use an astringent condiment first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be fixed on that very ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps away because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many stones according to the length of the thread that you must hold taut and light, and heat them slightly over the fire; and put one or two perforations in the patient's ear, and raise it up with both feet from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make this stone upon stone until the water comes out completely, and thus it jumps out completely; and if you see, then take a reed, and insert one of the heads into the ear, and the other head heats it over fire so long as the thickest part of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds until the water comes out completely, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, such as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer an extraction with fine tweezers; and that's the easier thing to remove what's in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there appear any worms, then treat them with subtle tweezers; and if none appear, take a string whose form this is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And bind the most subtle thread on the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then tie it firmly to the entire cord; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, then wrap the cord with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations such as the ancients have experimented with in the elimination of worms, and you will find it or read about treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, because that is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or tin, narrow below to a small hole, and wide above to distill; and for pressing within the distillation with one instrument of well-made bronze for this purpose, and if you see, take one scraper and wrap around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and all that you have of medicines on the string, and the string be in the ear; then push inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and if the patient feels inside, and the distillation is a pot heated over fire so it distills into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a small hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through stopping of wounds or new growth inside the ear, and these stoppings often come very far into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes there is one pot overflowing with the hole, and one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then the one that comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is from grievous cleansing in multiple dispositions, and in that which one can see, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatula whose form this is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be gentle and careful in front of and behind all the way, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is from new growth or flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle tweezers and cut lightly, until all that flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the poultices are worn out in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly by the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the popping sensation that patients complain of when they hear it, pierce lightly, and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a poultice according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mummy.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then care for it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes from the decoration, then plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of paperwax.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This wax that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to spread with forceps and tweezers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on the glass vitriol broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if the wax peels off, then cauterize with a lenticular subtile cautery, and after the incision move slowly; and many times repair, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hellebore.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper the eyes one thing that seems like gruel in its form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on both sides of the paper above and below; the works are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the donation wide, then flay each part lightly, then take out with forceps.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot take it out without piercing the paper slightly, then do not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, tie it with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing violent, for the ointments restore the flesh soon.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and take the grandine with tweezers, cut and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not harm anything; and when the grandine is cut, let a solution of salt water flow, and cure the wound of those who bring forth flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is smeared on paper towels above, and this happens more to children than to grown-ups, and it troubles them greatly, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on top, and are their paper towels moist below their eyebrows covered by the swelling and appearance of exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lid onto your breasts and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers from one side to the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a mixture of rose water and spatula, cutting a slit of the large size, but not greater than the wound or making a wound of vinegar; and make the skin smooth in depth until you reach the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, exinach comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Here is the translation:
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the surgeon does not open in the beginning of the cut, so slightly enlarge the cut until he sees; then pull it as we have said, then damp cloths in air and water, and put on the bandage, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who burn sulfur and put it on top in order to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is cleansed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to a boil, then apply poultices soothingly until it is cleansed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs from paper grow differently than those of nature, and are whitened, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases as usual tears and softening of the papers and blurring, to the point of destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to four manners: either by fire cautery together, or by aqueous medicine as described in the chapter on cautery, and is made either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, that's good; if not, put an awl through each thread above; and let this be at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow below these hairs, and draw one thread above all the paper, and turn it to a razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs that are grown together, from the great tear to the small one; then pull out one thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an oak leaf, as the sprig of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper being divided into.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is someone who needs it, take a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then fill the spatula on both lines that you have signed, and begin from the large tear just a little bit; and be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the thread into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape it all; then assemble the two lips with a seam of a needle to all the fine wool yarn, and wipe away the blood, and make the surplus threads on both sides to all things sticking, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, just leave the seam and the threads for three or four days; then care for the wound without sewing anything constraining, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is muddy (as the ancients said), and that's a work without fear; and if there is another way: it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, to three separate threads according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and things are not equal, then take a needle where there is thread, and put it in the figure; and put one thread near the great drain, and the other thread near the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar assuaging ointments; and sometimes happen that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you transform the paper and make a hole within according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the surface are; and cut off at both ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the paper from the oil, and strain the two cauterizations from both parties together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die, dry up, and fall away, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the wound has some forces, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and the hairs can no longer be felt; and this is the shape of the two hounds that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put one thread of soft and subtle silk on it; then assemble the threads and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange in the chase another thread of fine silk briefly, and knot the end of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and let it be under the sun so that the work is revealed, for this is a subtle and minute work; then put the needle through all the chase in the root of the hair grown together, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you guide it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it comes to the end of the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh is restored on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of the natural eyebrows, and raise it with that which you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the pouring of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, so there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden wound, or by incision, or by burning, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treatment is that you cut open this wound, and separate the lips of it, and put a linen cloth inside, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, then the disease returns worse than the first one; but it works with soft things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or althea and flaxseed cooked, and oil of yarrow melted in some of the oils, and wrap a cloth around it, and cure it this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal in the same form as it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is below which is truly called "axacrati" and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and tearing and cautery and similar things; and the way of working with it is that you take an awl which has a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left forearm as far as the right side, so that the threads come out in two pieces of skin; then cut the flesh above all the awl, and the incision should be wide enough for a spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper comes out as it should, that's good; if not, then take a rasp and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and be the holes of the two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "I greece"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are grown below, from what follows the paper; then join the two severed parts with a thread of linen; then apply the cure for what we have said regarding soft medicines and poultices, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or an opening or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two leaves of a linen cloth, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine to do everything they can to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling has occurred in the same way as the paper above is bound with white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a rasp under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers until you cut what is suitable for a subtle spatula, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot bear having the spatula too tight or causing harm to the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove this assembled part, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let all this assembled part be healed, and sometimes in the oil add a little salty water, and lift up sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and place wet wool on top of it in abundance of eggs; and after three days use the colic remedy and similar things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the grime of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the grime is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and cooked between pincers, one cannot bear; and both forms begin near the large vein, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then coils the grime between pincers with small double loops, and stretches it above; then take a needle, and insert one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little bit and push it into the grime, and make it pierce all the way to the end of the needle, and tie the grime with a thread and stretch it above, and scrape off the rest on the side of the grime that follows the prune and silk until the hair reaches the head; then cut the remaining part in the root of the vein to all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or vein as it was before incision, so that through the incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes stretch the grime only to the onyx and thread, as we have said; then scrape off everything at the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, throw a little bit of broom seed into the oil and a colic remedy made from litargyris, and leave it until the next day; then apply the treatment as necessary until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the grime is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the onyx cannot enter, many times this appearance of grime is treated with medicines; and it is born as I have told in the division, and when you see it growing, work the oil of the patient, and take a spatula slightly rough according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the grime above gently, and if you see that it is not diminishing and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the oil a colic remedy made from litargyris and red colic and broom seed, and stop the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the oil, like an aposteme grows warm, then milk it, and first cure the warm aposteme until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh at the vein causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it to the onyx, and cut off a part and not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill into the oil a red colic remedy made from litargyris.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Es are some men's eyes that never have redness, and cover the prune-like skin and restrain on the papers and turn to the opposite direction, and seem like a rose of balustrade; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in one's hand, then opens the eyes, and keeps all the flesh fitting to this, and sustains with force; then cuts the first layer, and goes all cutting until the end, and takes care not to hurt the eye during the operation; and the incision should be as we have said in the incision of the tongue and with small forces, so that one removes the scab, just as the form shows after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all flesh removed, then drips oil from a seal or distills red liquid and similar corrosive medicines, and puts on the oil afterwards cotton with egg white, so that it becomes sure of hot aposteme; and if there remains nothing, and the wound starts to swell, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the oil and treat hot aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all the flesh that has been removed from the eye by this likeness.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you hasten the cure of each weak eye by natural means; and by accidental means, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If veins are red that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of sight and weaken the eye forever.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary then that you first look at the eye where the redness is, if it is elsewhere, and there is no other disease except for this redness; then take the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and be the needles subtle double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ligatures by degree in one piece according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the forces those veins subtly, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to bleed the eye at all points of the scalp, and do this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red pepper juice into the eye to corrupt what remains of the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all of that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyelids, and let it be some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of warm aposteme, then resume according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the abscess of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon so calls "arissati" abscess: when you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in it that you cut into the aposteme, where it should decay, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then replace it with all the instruments that are there according to this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and make it from iron into one chief bent, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the lump is congealed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bowels is congealed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew itself and is not apostemed, and bad things do not happen to it, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other cause than to bring the fistula back to the pertus of the navel according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a forest according to this form, and be the head of iron at three angles, and the fistula should be thinned out up to the chief as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier,
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyelids open fully and it does not come out of the neck or decrease, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then put poultices or bandages made from iron to suck up, then put a lien on the eye made from aloes, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and drapes; and the manner of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye has need of; then strain it above a strong binding cloth, and repeat the poultices to suck up without causing harm; then remove the poultices and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the lien becomes worn out, then it is necessary that you restrain it much; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then repeat the plastering and draping and liening and poultices until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the bursting of the vitreous humor
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the vitreous humor, then it bursts forth, and comes out like a grain of resin, and it is so astonishing to see; then if you see it burst, the operation is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below just up to the top, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the socket; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the vitreous humor around, and strain it well, then remove the awl and put on the eye a damp linen cloth soaked in egg white; and let it be until the threads choose with the vitreous humor, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes show great appearance, then puncture with a subtle spatula that comes from beneath the eyebrow, and correct the moisture albugina and descend the eyelids, and enter it in short order; then pull it out until it is clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bottom of the eye.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This malady which is called "alcunnati" is not outside the eye which is assembled in the pupil, appearing like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is that you sit the patient on a prepared and right siege, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move the head so long as you see the bow come up to your eyes; then it should be fixed, and not descend and be dismantled, nor will the light diminish, and the patient will see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then place the patient's head between your hands, then take the subtle spatulum and make it go on the corneal tissue at the point of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, so long as the bow comes out; and when it is out, then distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey or boiling water mixed with fenugreek, then be cured by another cure until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have likenesses of waters in our division, and what is necessary for piercing; thus work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, outside of light for the sun, and keep the good eye and hold it very tightly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument next to the crown at the width of a bean on the edge of the eye towards the smaller tear duct; then push the instrument called "almagda" properly, and turn your hand until it pierces into the eye and feels that almagda comes into the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the length of the space which is from the prunella to the end of the nourishment; and that's the crown of the eye; if you see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the corneal cloth, and then put the instrument just above or next to where the water is, then press it under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument is on his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little, and if the water rises again on the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is stuck and will not rise, then extract slowly in circling your hand little by little; and then return to water some little gem, and leave off from that eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on top of the eye a poultice or a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, put on top a honeycomb with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep by far, but make it subtle, then put in alumina, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare the patient's bed with a dark cloth, so that he sleeps on his back in this tenebrous state; and be careful of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days later; then release him in the same dark room, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage up to seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision now, but rather hasten this, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Se apostemes chaus vient, that thou removest the eye in front of the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the aposteme; and when it is pacified, then remove the sight and place on its face a veil to cover for any day, and be there in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house step by step, and convert yourself to your place; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country he had seen someone make almagda pierce, which causes tears to flow, but I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor did I read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the shapes of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see; and they are properly from iron.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of these is made of this same subtlety, and the end in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	On the skin above
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There are many times when diverse growths or sores appear, because of which there are some that seem like scorpions in many places; and if there are such ones, then the sore has been enchanted with flux of foul color, and the sore is soft of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then in that sore which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you cause the patient to sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those sores, and treat them fiercely; then grasp with what you can sustain at the fine edge of a razor on one side, as long as you know that that sore is completely dried.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be removed, then open it with all the subtle instruments gently, until nothing remains; and if without stirring or aposteme inflamed, then proceed as is necessary; and if it is malignant apostemes, then hasten and cauterize as much as possible, until the wound is stanchied and all the skins are removed; then pour in wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nail works and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is clean; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is flesh stuck in the bone above, which prevents instruments from coming: then you must put a piece of linen thread about a finger thick, and wet your hands with your fingers, and leave about an inch of space between each notch or less; and have the patient place the tip of the thread in their nail to some power, and pull it out gently as far as the inside of the mouth comes; and children do this many times at school, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes from the nail with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know the one after the other as you are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Treat that so long as you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then take the son, stop the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the new skin just as before; do that for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a bandage of cloth some days until he is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, use them; and that's the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills oils and medicines on the new skin:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, semblant à une lampe ouverte, si comme une cainne, et li conduis ausi;
de la char sor le neis	On the skin above
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a sickness called "telul" arises on the skin above the navel; it grows and becomes great in size until it is a visible thing to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the top, and remove all fat, then place the cautery or burning medicine upon it; and if one delays in cutting until it is great, take heed lest it become hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts into it at any time, a great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul color, and you see that you can cut it all off, then empty the patient and cut off the abscess without fear, and cure the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the navel is cut open and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knows that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to do thus with each one, if you look and see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together with a seam, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already split apart on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a seam, bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and incense upon powdered blood, and put a piece of strong plaster or another kind of plaster above, and let it sit for as long as it can by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses within the lips that are hard, resembling grains of millet, and smaller or larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each notch, and take out the contents with pincers and cauterize each part; then apply a poultice to the area after incision of vitriol bruised, until the blood is staunched; and then leave the lip open, and cure the area with drying things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the skin of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth called "albulus" arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut off at its root, and let the bow or blood flow; then place upon the area vitriol bruised, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if that growth returns after incision, and many times occurs, then cut it off again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you sit the patient in your hands, and his head be in your sight, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness and jaundice and other discolorations, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, then continue to repeat the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, for this reason that the rasor used to scrape away the teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing out as long as you can, for it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to where one has no excuse for drawing.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to vomit, then it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth that is aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	The patient suffers much pain and thinks it is the tooth of St. Peter, and has the good tooth pulled out; but the pain does not depart from him because of this, until the evil humor departs, for we have already tried to do so with those saints; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all four spaces with a very sharp instrument to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it to your two hands or with subtle forceps at the first notch and notch, until it is well extracted, then secure the forceps well; and let the patient's head be in your holy place between your knees, and hold him so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and push it inside from each side lightly, and move it just as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Et if the tooth is pierced and bitten, so it's necessary that you fill it with cloths, there where the perforations are; and if it's strained subtly with forceps, so it doesn't break when straining; and it's necessary to work carefully around the gum for dislodging the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient through the evil of the root causing greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the carriage and bring about great diseases for the roots that remain or for the jawbone they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is torn out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and verjuice; and if blood comes, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol powder; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back on you when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and should be made of well-forged iron, and should have teeth to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the roots stay at the rear, it is necessary that you put a wet cotton cloth on the place for one day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the skin is softened, put in the forceps called "algefri", by which the head appears to be a gentle soother; and inside make them as if with a file, and that's the shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is also known as "palainche", of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is strong and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out by this means, that is good; but if not, then help it with all the instruments, of which the forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you aid with this instrument that has two handles, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great tongs, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters skilled in themselves find their instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of bones and flesh, or it breaks on the bone or on another bone, or it can, then seek out the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then reduce all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural bodily form, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young maidens, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be soothed or trimmed: then file; and if it is rough with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and it is similar to one small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point above:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the edge is worn away little by little over a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can trim it, then use a file like this in its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little over a few days gradually, so that it does not move until it is even; then smooth out the end of all roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and hurt the tongue, then file off the roughness as much as needed, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth in front are loose, or by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without spitting, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but it doesn't work; then they must be restrained by a thread of gold, for silver wires become green and perish, but gold ones never do; and let the middle wire not be too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligning, take the thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then put the roots between the loose teeth, as many as there are one or more, until you come to a healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and gently, until it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the ends of the thread to a pair of tweezers, and assemble them, and rejoin between the healthy tooth and the tongue; and then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it comes undone or the threads break, so restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and step by step, as we have said; and do not meddle with it if you are not wise and skilful, and at times make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and restrain it as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	At no time is this ligament which comes below the tongue or naturally so, unless it occurs at birth or by accident of a wound that has been sewn up; and the work is such that you operate on the patient's mouth, with their head in your healthy one, and lift up their tongue; then tie off the nervous ligament from the wide part, until the tongue is freed from its place, and if there is hardness or night, it is due to a sudden wound, so put in the unguent and tie off that ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep near the artery which is below; and when you have done this, lift up the patient's head with rosewater and vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen tent under their tongue; and let the patient sleep every night so that the wounds do not sully.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Et if bleeding comes from decorum, then set it on the vitriol stone and broil; and if the blood flows freely, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for that; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that it is of foul color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards gangrene, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent, and cut a small opening with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the wound flows at your operation, then put vitriol powder on it until it is stopped, then return to your operation until you have done everything; then lift up the linen cloth and dry it, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes a growth comes inside the throat called "godath", which are properly named II amandres; and when you treat them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, beware: if it is an abscess of little sense and a fusiform color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the bleeding of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is a white color around, and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first look to see if the abscess has calmed down and is appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sit the patient down before the sun, and his eyes should be in their socket, and let him open his mouth and grasp the instrument between his hands, and press his tongue below all the apparatus, so that is the shape; and it should be of silver or fine copper just like small knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue all over this instrument and see the abscess, then take a needle and thread it through the amber, and pull it tight above as much as you can; and leave nothing loose with the threads, then shape the instrument accordingly, so that it has the form that appears to be some force; and although the head is curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or flint.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument present, then shape it with pliers, so that it has the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make it taper from one end to the other; and when you have shaped one of the amber pieces, then shape the other in the same way; and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and if blood vessels appear, gargle the patient again; or use cooked apple pulp, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then continue to cure until they are healed; and sometimes new abscesses arise in the throat that are like the two amber pieces, so shape them accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside the throat, to wit, a small sense abscess; and I had well closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale because the passage was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and would have been dead if she remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had risen up more than two rows through the two openings of the birth canal.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then hastened at once, and inserted an instrument into one opening, then the fire was lit, and a great portion of pus came out; then I refilled the other opening in the birth canal, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the instrument into this abscess, and cut off a part of it, and only a little blood issued; and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess would repeatedly grow back again, filling up the place I had emptied out, until it became very large; afterwards I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing further; and I left those parts, and let God do with them after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it rises up to the eye and is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is under a lump and rounded, then it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess has calmed down, and it is subtle, then you should cut it; and the one that is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then you should avoid making an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have remembered before this; then insert the onychine into the uve, and bring it out below, and cut at the two instruments that I said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover up the superfluity that is outside of natural bounds; for if you cover more, you will cause harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then it is necessary that you use artifice in the cauterization to eliminate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cauterization is with boiling water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confesses with hot boiling water, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and in the use of this instrument, as is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient's head on a pillow or a cloth, just as hair is placed in a comb, and put the instrument on all of the medicine on the vein; and the patient should sit up straight on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, without going down to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand on all of the medicine and press it on the vein for the length of half an hour, until you see it turn white and the medicine's inflammation is appeased; and if you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton reaches the vein; and do this many times until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start the medicine's cautery again, start it again, and afterwards apply a poultice around the vein with butter, and purify everything that surrounds the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and cured by gargling until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them into one pot, and add a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with clay from a hard earth, and inside the pot have one instrument carved according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it is of silver or lead, and whether one of the keys is thrust into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is numbified; after which it often resumes, until the eye dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the warm swelling's advent, for many things happen then; and do not do this unless at the declination of the warm swelling.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cord and put a quill of egg inside the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the quill of egg does not allow vapor to oppress the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it seems to be stuck in the throat like a bone or a fish spine, or something else; so it is necessary that you try what you can see and press the tongue on the sun with all the instrument, until you see the thing move; and whatever does not appear and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the top, it will be stuck, and then you will pull it out further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglote, lest all life depart from him, nor push the bone inside; and make sure the patient puts the instrument in place, because the thing is awkward; then push down, or pull it out fully with all the instrument equally, until it is fully out.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the phlegm of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No time is medicine without sweat, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when that does not help, then look at the patient's throat to the sun, then press his tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the abscess, so treat it with all small incisions, or with fine forceps that are worth for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not worth, take a braided cord, and put it in the throat of the patient, then bind the part of the cord with hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is troubled by water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full vessel of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the abscess feels the water, it will burst.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not burst as we have said, subfumigate the patient with asafoetida, at the instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the ear; do this many times, for it will break without stirring.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has charcoal and viscera, and have a cloth covered with a perforated sheet in the middle, and in that hole put the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in their mouth and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out but comes just to the sweat; and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, then continue the fumigation many times; and let the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for her to go forth by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which you treat the phlegm is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering the throat; and it has a resemblance to a surgeon's beak, and on it there is an asperity of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and look at this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is the same as itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those wounds that are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the shoulder bone are different from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as are abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it be until it is rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay perforation until it is hard, so it will harm the main member; or if it is near the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it is dead; and it does not behoove that you pierce a hard abscess without digestion being accomplished, except for that which is near the foundation, lest it bursts forth and becomes elongated inside, and there comes to be a fistula; and it cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is soft according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and of the swelling and firming up of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where the abscess appears more dependent on its location, and where it opens outwards; and the perforation should be made from long to short in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints, nerves, or arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who are afflicted, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in its early stage, so it is worth waiting that you leave the incision open until it is fully digested as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you make the incision before that, so the body of the abscess will become longer and filled with much pus, and by chance the lips and the depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that needs to be cut open according to the width of the body, as needed by the members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, small cuts, and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover and sew, when it has become as rough as a rag, and is exhausted, then you must do as one does with infants: and if there are those that are split in three angles, and if there are those from which you cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the armpits; and if there are those where you make a circular incision, and other cuts and similar suture.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil who have not point of chief, if as aposteme soft superficial, it seems that you pierce plain; and it seems when the apostemes is big, and it has gathered great bowe, and you pierce, so do not pull out all the bowe in that hour, but a part; then stop the aposteme just until the next day, then pull out something else above; do this many times with ease, as long as the bowe runs out; similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or women bearing, or little children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits jump out at times with the issue of the bowe, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then therefore eschew this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your aposteme, if the wound bleeds, and look to see if the wound of the aposteme is small; and if it's a plain cut, then stretch a tent of linen or old cotton over it; and if it's a large aposteme, and there are many holes, then it's necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together one against another; and if you have cut into the aposteme some part of skin, and you have sewn it around, then it's necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and bind it to the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs at your work, then apply cold and easy water, and damp cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then apply a government and treatment, and the powders that I have said to be used in this book, and if it's during the winter, and the lesion or abscess is very nervous, then it's necessary that you put on wet cloths soaked in vinegar and hot oil; and if it's in summer, and the lesion is fatty, then it's necessary that you put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the abscess and the pus and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and see chapter.
des soros	of boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the head comes with small abscesses, and they are like the ways of us that are in meshes, just as the weaver of a spider's web, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It is of fat and such that has moisture also as pulps; and if there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the cut are such that you should try out all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then heat is applied above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, then scrape off without leaving anything on the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything; then plunge in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and silk, and apply the dressing to the wound, and let it be until the next day; and this cures what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it will not remain overnight; then care for the wound with an ointment as is fitting, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is not large, cut it according to this form, from long to short; and throw away the scabs, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in drawing out what lies beneath; and if the artery makes you contrary, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this with the abscess if it is hard, and to cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut above the hard abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for there will be less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or those that have no moisture are in the head or in an old woman; and I found one like a dull, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if anyone had done anything to it, they would have made as great a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come to the children's chief and the roots of the ears, let the opening always be at its most dependent place so that the pus may issue forth; and the cure should be done as it is needed.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are connected one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located within its own place, just as the boil and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar cases of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Then, when you see a good disposition to touch it, and it is similar in color to the body, and quiet on all sides, and not hardening at the collarbone or artery or duct, and not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut above, and scrape off each part, and take out the two lips of the wound with your fingers, if you need to, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and proceed slowly and carefully, making sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor make a wound that is too wide or deep, so that your hand may escape, and do not go too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol broth or some powders that stop blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is staunched, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then examine carefully if there remain any small abscesses, and cut them and cleanse.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, then it is not necessary for you to cut that abscess at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall down without harm; then dress the wound with old Egyptian cotton dipped in oil.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire abscess, then it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluity remaining due to the greatness of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and draw forth, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, open there where it becomes clear; and the opening is done thus as was said before, depending on it, then introducing tentatives with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well purged, then the cure with ointment applies to the flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinsy
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat, which is called "epiglote", be opened; and one does not make aid by this, because all the veins and the prominence of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the prominence of the neck, it is necessary to cut open the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it below three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the size of the syphac wound, not in the cartilage; and that place is suitable for the section of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all the way around, then cuts the flesh as far as it comes to the chin; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then closes the syringe, just as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein at the chin which bursts forth through the broken place and due to the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all together without leaving any cartilage; then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Also it says that one should not do this just yet until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and his life is slipping away.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglote for this reason that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command to sew up the wound and cure it, until it is cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the womb; and I was summoned to heal her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not yet been drained or led away from the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was well; and nothing happened to the maiden except that she lost her voice, and then returned to her normal condition; therefore I say that in cutting into the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called an "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess with a greenish color, and it occurs mostly in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no fault.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is in two ways, which is similar to fat in us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to make a fire except for what is small, and search all around: if you find it as I do not know how to treat fat, and cannot be healed by any means, then cut it out, just as one cuts out fat, and treat it with all its surroundings, if there is no pain; and search well everything, and cure it as needed, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of the tumor
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are ours, which I will say all similar things; and now it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between us and exit.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is hot and feverish, until the suppuration has passed away, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the nout there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a sac, which is its own pouch, and it is according to the color of the body, and begins like a small seed, and becomes large; and they are in two similarities, either fatty or moist, and much of their color are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the tumor, that you examine and investigate first all the instruments that are called "surrounding" tissues, according to what its form will be or chapter which comes later.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiry into abscesses in us is that you take or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two pokes and pokes until you know that the instruments have pierced the kernel, then as it is according to the greatness of the abscess; then extract the obstacle, and beware lest it burst forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture flows forth, regardless of its color, do it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes, know that it is fat, so do it then in a cross shape, and take hold with pincers, and scrape off lightly from each part and follow the direction where it lies, pulling it out whole without leaving anything behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is nothing left, it will come back many times; and if one piece remains and the blood troubles you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, apply pressure to the wound, and put on soothing poultices for hot abscesses, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the wound is large, then cut off the two lips of the wound, and cure what remains.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or another obstacle is contrary to your action, and you hasten and apply a poultice of vitriol, and let it lie two or three days or until the wound purrs, and the pus settles; then return to cutting off what remains of the tumor.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here is the translation:
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of tumors are many and similar, as you see here: great, medium-sized, and small; and also there are tumors that have two covers in three ways; and also there are tumors that have three covers, and they are the same in three ways; and also there are tumors that have two covers, and one cover only, and they are the same in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are cutting, and some have an edge that does not cut more than from one side, by which we skin the nose, because this is why we do not cut the vein or nerve; and among these intervening ones are the hemostats replied in straps, so that the patient does not feel anything at the opening of abscesses; and they are three kinds: great, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and one does not use more than one instrument in a charmed place, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling skinning instruments, according to this form, by which we stem blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes at the place that heals completely from veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Breast milk swells in certain men when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem breasts of a woman; and remain swollen and full, and whoever wants to cure them must shape them according to this form up to line .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and apply a medicinal poultice to the wound, releasing scabs; then bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast droops down and becomes enlarged like women's due to its size, as it does in women, so make an incision in two places above, through two similar fissures; from which one will be joined to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, so you must fill the wound with damp cotton in corrosive oil; and leave it until the remaining fat and flesh are consumed, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses in the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard forms of scrofula or if it has nodules, and some of them contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment according to this form until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions for scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is blocked and the skin above it is bound tight, so many times abscesses come; and likewise it happens to the vein being drained and abscessed; and if one knows this when it's because of the artery, then the abscess is long and deep inside; and when you feel it in your hands, then you feel a distance; and when it's because of the vein, then it appears as if it's gone away; and it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it's under the armpits and shoulders and neck and many other places, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to shun the fire treatment, and also he who is at the head should avoid it, and in him who has an inflamed artery going above the long skin; then make a cut on the pulse, and carefully uncover the artery from the ligatures, so that it is completely exposed; then insert beneath it an awl, and have it pierce through to the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you about the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then point the spot between the two ties with an injector so that the pus inside comes out and the abscess is relieved; then apply the treatment as before, until the ligature falls off; then treat those things belonging to ointment, according to what belongs to it, until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to the cutting of the vein, it is necessary that you take with your hand all that you can from the abscess to the entire skin, then insert the awl beneath the spot you hold in your hand, and have it pierce through, and there be a double thread, so that you draw it out on the other side; then bind the abscess as I have said, with the ligature of one of the two parts at the two joints of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads will not come forth, insert another awl throughout all the thread beneath all the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and restrain the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until the superfluitous matters come out, then cut the superfluity of the skin and leave what is bound; then apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and then administer treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses in the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come to the artery and vein when they are ruptured or due to excessive strain, so too do abscesses come to the kidneys when they are fatigued or from excessive labor and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, and it happens more often at the joints and in all places where there are joints; and that's the grievous abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one is pressed firmly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not quite deep within the body, but just below the skin; and it will swell on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and he who is at a joint does not need to be cut by iron: perhaps there would be contraction; and he who is in the head or in the forehead, will make the skin puffed out.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut into its root; and if it is great, suspend it by the ligature, and scrape, then bone and sew the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great hanging lips
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Once upon a time it happens in bellies and not elsewhere thus the other place; and it is a disease that is called "fungi" by its resemblance to them and has fine roots and thick heads; and there are small and very great ones; and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else and there was no difference between them they were white and had fine roots and were split open and immediately began to corrupt with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the operations of incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the abscess is white and moist and with fine roots; so cut at a spatula's width, and have the cauterization done by fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess infected by enchantment, and I will come to the cure of abscess hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, and est sus le ventre and en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, or of sanc qui cort de voines or d'arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, or of ventositeit; and se c'est par la routure dou syfac and par l'issue dou bouel, si est li color de l'aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, and est legiere chose sens dolor, and apert de diverse issue.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it springs back, and then returns, and by chance it may be solidified, and greatly swells at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and apparent when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, so it appears by these signs the aposteme is great and hard, and fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windosity, so it is soft to touch, and the work is that you see if the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or windosity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave the wound alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or bowel, you must instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then signal all around the belly; then command him to lie down slowly between your hands, then move the site of the abscess around the belly, and cut off the top half of it at the great uncinate process; then tie it with a strong thread or cord securely, and have the surrounding tissue firmly bound; then work on the upper half of the abscess extended over the ligature, and inject your indicated dose, and cure the intestine; if you find it caught in the ligature, release it, and push the intestine back into the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, take it at the uncinate process, and remove the superfluity; and if the artery or vein resists, go slowly around, then return to your work and take two forceps, and insert two thin threads, and wrap the two forceps around what you have done in a cross as when you pierced; then strain the abscess into four places on the forceps, and if you see anything, remove the forceps, and leave the site so it can heal, and cut off dead flesh by yourself; or you will drain it when it becomes subtler and passable, then cure what is needed, and sever the abscess as we have said; and extract blood or moisture that you find, then cure the site of what is needed, and close the site.
dou chancre	of the abscess
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the appearances of abscesses, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; and we say that abscesses are born in marshes, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients say that when abscesses are in a place or can be reached as if it were in the very flesh, and in the groin, and in similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make them healthy if they have manifest repletion; then prepare the patient a good place to do the work; then throw your gallows or abscess, and shape it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow out completely, and inspect the wound with your hand or some other thing; and if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it so that the blood is stopped; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is done, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: thus it is revealed; and one should not touch with iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is mortal; therefore when you treat this likeness of dropsy called "revealed" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease than dropsy, as all stomach troubles and similar things; so do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and they only have dropsy and are neither too old nor too young, then thus work: lift up the patient straight onto your hands, and the attendants press on the belly pushing out water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spatula-shaped bone according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cut at a point, and yet not so deep that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and cannot be injured; then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must make an incision of three fingers' breadth above on the point; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of three fingers' breadth; and if it is due to biliousness, make it on the right side, and do not let the patient lie on the incision so that superfluities do not run to that weak part; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and stop it up, and lift your hand away from all the space between the skin and the fascia just as in shearing at the length of an eyebrow or around; then pierce the fascia until the spasm comes to its natural state, and that is the way of the water, then treat it further, and put this instrument back in which has the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it seems like a fine silver chain, and is of earth or light charcoal, and has three small holes in the part below; and on one side, there are three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now flow down on the instrument; then empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed at this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they fall prone, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of their strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulse; then remove the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now because of the key that stops the hole which is on the syphilis, for which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and drain off a small quantity of water; do this some day, and take care not to flow until there is only a little water left.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient and leave much water, then cure of sepulture or warm sand, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and make him drink; and cure with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	None are born of children who do not have a wart on the penis, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is so necessary that he pierce at all the pores very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the wart in a clove of garlic, tie and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, then take out the clove, make him urinate, and then put it back; and by chance it does not need, because the urine that comes forth will not let the clove stay.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He who has a small perforation is treated with the remedy of blown glass, as we have said, so it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the perforation in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the perforation at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot menstruate because the matter cannot reach the marriage bed, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, then place the head of the penis and cut it as one would shape a quill, so that the perforation opens in the middle, as it should; and be careful not to let blood flow from it which often happens, and if it does, stop it with something that stops bleeding, and cure the wound until they are healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these boils come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; and it is necessary that you take them at one time very subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put a damp cotton swab in Egyptian oil; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of foul color and foul odor, then you must apply a cauterization to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it open, and if the boil is on the shaft of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is closed, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you treat it together, so the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and there comes forth and corruption in its sheath and in the foreskin; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment made from the rind of green pomegranates and vinegar upon the powder of honey and flour, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, so apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizes are of two dispositions together: that is to say, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, so it is necessary that you insert a linen thread into the urethra of the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair has grown out at the head of the penis which have not been circumcised, or there has been an injury or abscess, then it is necessary to cut it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and be delivered the head of the penis from all parts; and if this is a grievous thing to do, so it is necessary that you cut through the spatula some portion at the head of the penis and of the skin; then divide it carefully in two, and put a thin piece of moist linen cloth into cold water, so that it will not reattach.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the cutting off of continuity like other wounds; however, when we do this work by our own will and especially for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have asked the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision around one day, with great forces, and all a new moon; so it was the case where there are two skins, and by chance if you cut the top one and leave the bottom one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is to cut, and there is double pain, and the point of the member is not ensured; and at the mundification of the tongue by chance escapes the iron, and hinders the work, and many times it happens thus that they do not need mundification and I have asked.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mundification that is done with force, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you press your hand, cut it equally in all parts; but make sure the son is well wrapped around the skin; and the manner of the first work is this: cause the child to think that you are not doing anything more than tying the thread around the penis just once, and then let it lie in all ways you can; then let it rest between your hands straight up, and restore the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or blow, and draw it up as high as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the lead signet with a double thread, then tie it below one link to another link; and hold it between the two straps by the second strap on the pouch and at the ankle indicator, and cut between the two links, then lift the blowpipe above hastily and draw the head of the penis; then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for that is the mothers; and put powder on top and on top the powder sticks to a yolk of cooked egg mixed with rosewater, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for the mundification is this: the two fingers should be held and should be pressing, and should be equal in length.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the bleeding inside flows out at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the edges make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has subsided, and scrape lightly; then cut as much as you can move, and take care not to harm any part of the penis.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound with sudden bleeding powder, which we have said or treated in the treatment of powders, and if you cut too much with the knife, and it goes above, then it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until he is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Li retenue of the urine is a blockage of stone, or blood congealed, or bladder, or new charcoal, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention due to the stone which is lodged at the back or nape of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should stretch his belly from above down to the back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder will be constrained to express itself through the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "siringue", whose form is this: and it should be made of fine silver hair, like the feathers of a bird; and it should be one and a half palms long, and it should be refined at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the top of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the top of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the surplus yarn and tie it just at the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a siege, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water; then put the syringe lightly into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis above towards the mouth; then put the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel come close to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduit or way out is twisted; then let the thread be all along the wool piece and piece, and the urine will follow the yarn, then pull it out, and make the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcers or bleeding comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument called "clepsedre", and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	Elle est close, and if it has three holes: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the leaves are shaved so that the medicine is such that it stops well the urethra without addition, so that one can pull out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you put your medicines in the bladder, place the chief of the keusteur in the moisture, and draw on the drawing who is there; so you will draw the moisture to the keestour, and then push strongly on the drawing in; so the moistures will go in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: thus.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of arnica, and the head is higher; and under one side or the cord falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see enemas the bladder, then tie between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot on the fire; then insert the chief of the enema into the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture comes, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert the thread strongly in those holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles an awl, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone and together with medicines and we have said the difference between the stone that is born in the reins and all the signs and in which stone one must work by cutting and in the bladder and in the penis; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is born in the bladder is more common in children and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and then hair forms, and the patient's penis becomes hardened and inflamed, and it happens many times, and then it subsides; and many of these stones fall into the foundations; and childhood cures are much lighter until they have three years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is at its mean between youth and old age; and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cathartic, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it hinders sometimes from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes come out high; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely declining downwards; then search and touch inside; if you feel the stone in place, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the touching of all, moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger and insert it at the far end where you see it cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand above the coils, and with his left hand take away the skin that is below the coils in the part where you are making the cut; then put the spatula together, so it forms.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between that which is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the naively; and be straight above the stone, and so be at the fundament, and be the width of the traverse if it is long in front, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great; by chance the pressure may be so great that it jumps out without effort; and know that there are some stones which have angles and borders: it is difficult to emerge; and there are those which are smooth, like a glans, and rounded, through which the issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And then where there are angles and borders, make the width greater; and if it doesn't jump out, it is necessary that you stretch above with tongs that are like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so it does not escape; or you place below the instrument, curved at the head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge the pore little by little, and if the sand falls out, strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, place first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then draw forth, and the small ones afterwards if there be more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or urine flows freely where the wound cannot close; but still you should try with a file or pincers as tongs, until you cut it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense, aloes, and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and apply a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil, rose water, and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then revive the patient by his neck, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, then arise very well the wound of oil and water, and then anoint him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses come to the wound and ulcers, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by these things, which is known in this way that urine does not flow with it: then pour your decoction into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and ruin it; then wash the wound with water, vinegar, and salt, and help him in all ways you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works by which you cure him, that you bind his two buttocks together, and apply medicines to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra conduit of the penis, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; so take care as I say thus, that you cut many times, for cutting is excused by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already know it like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go further into the bladder; then push the bowstring into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the bowstring back and forth in the stone, as much as you can, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will come out soon, and press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is soon broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders, then take one thread below the stone and another above, then bend the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and loosen the string, and clean up the congealed blood that is in the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and it is defended against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who will uncover herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, so it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to, until it comes to the root of the hip; then cut on the stone at the root of the hip against the middle of the crotch, there where it appears in its natural shape, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her thigh above or below the stone, and be the first small; then pour oil into the incision, if you sense the stone so far from the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with holes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	So it is necessary to know the likenesses in order to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the bleeding abates, then put vitriol powder on the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then come back to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work; and if the bleeding abates, and this is due to the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound and strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone, nor trouble it, lest by chance the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the place is clean, then return to your work until the stone is forth.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia of flesh
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramace aquouse is nothing else but the gathering of moisture or white leucorrhoea, which is below the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "leucorrhoea", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white leucorrhoea that we have said; and this does not happen unless there is nothing.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramace is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and it is spread out in that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And at times it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture takes many colors: or it's color declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or aquous white, and that happens often; and those are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is in white scab as we said, it is the abscess reopens, like a egg shape, and does not open the testicles, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, it is the abscess reopens with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scab, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove everything around the quartain, that is why the shape is as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quarter, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when we heal by fire, so it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then have him sit on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths underneath him; then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the instrument to one of the sides of the kidneys; then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the kidneys through the long part up to the point of the navel, and make the incision entirely straight while cutting the skin of the kidneys just so that it becomes white, and scrape subtilly according to our power; then pierce the white part plain with water in a large pit, and draw out all the water, and then put in onions, and stop the white part above; and do not touch the kidneys but only the white part; cut everything or by pieces similarly the edge of it subtil, that if you do not cut well, the water will return; and if the egg jumps forth to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syphac; then assemble the two leaves of the kidneys into a seam, then heal him as with other wounds, until he is sane.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the decoration of blood; then cut the testicle to all the suspended part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two roots; so cut the other part as you did the first one evenly, then stop the bleeding, and put in the wound a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil; and put another wet linen cloth soaked in wine and oil outside, and put above the two cones, and put above double cloths, and tie it all around with a cord according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and wrap them in wool according to this likeness and let them be sewn together in the belt of the braies, and one of the ends take above the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the fingernail; and the other end take above the two angles, and be all assembled with the rest of the binding in the buckle of the braier; and sometimes this root is treated with cauterization instead of iron surgery, and it's that you take a subtle cauterizing knife and cut the skin of the cones, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scab that contains the water is uncovered; then take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that scab into fine cuts, and scrape with this hot cauterizer.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And do the cauterizing in all ways that you can, until you have reached all; and take care that the fire does not touch the womb; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of dismemberment of blood, and be mindful that the works of cutting are; and if nothing makes you contrary, whether it be aposteme or dismemberment of blood or other thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that the abscess has subsided, then cause the patient to sit on a light siege; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the spatula's width, and insert the perforation into the length of the body; and let the holes be wide so that all the water can flow forth; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the remaining water run out, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, then you should insert a feather or the instrument with which one treats the waters of dropsy, by which the form is as before; and dilate the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or around that, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this reed-like thing there are many fears and preparations, for which it seems to me that more good comes from leaving it alone; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is due to many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads to the groin or from percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a grievous abscess; and sometimes by chance a painful and hard abscess appears with a foul color, and sometimes comes from a burst artery, or an engorged vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to a burst artery, it is known by the hot abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not seem right for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from an engorged vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with fingers, and can well perform the cutting above this appearance, and on other sorts; and that you cut open the groin, then lift it up high, and treat the white sacrum, and deliver the suspending thing from all parts of the sacrum.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the blood is already saturated with these veins' contents, then it is necessary to draw out the blood and the copiousness; and if it is averse to the syphac, or in what is within the vessels, then it is necessary to release all that tenacity, and the copiousness again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the lump is in the back part, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to that of the birchen bark, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient becomes grievously ill as he goes; and the cure for this disease is just as frightening as the previous one, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspensory of entrails down to your thighs, to all the vessels that are near the groin, and tie them tight; then cut into the spatula, cutting wide in the traversing place between the vessels, so that they are uncovered, and then scrape off each part, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples; then fix a needle where there is double thread, and tie it to the first position where the flesh has come, and tie it again to the other head; then cut into the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and drain off the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound just like the others or one that does not bleed, so that no vessel is left that nourishes one of the entrails; for by this, there will be no harm, and if all vessels come forth, it is necessary to drain the entrails to all vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become dry and unable to help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the scab
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est by the section that comes out of the syphac, or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the testicles; and this rupture is either from the syphac or from its extension, and there are these two ways it happens: either by percussion, or jumping, or brawling, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things; and when it's from the extension of the syphac, it has small drops, little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal down to the bottom, because the syphac presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the scab, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in diverse forms, just below the skin, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's departure through the scab.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the umbilicus, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, wherefore one should avoid them with fear.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine into his hand as far as it will go in the wound; then have him look down at his navel. Then lift up his scrotum and stretch the skin above; next cut away all the skin from the testicles along their length. Then insert fingers of the size needed to open the wound, so that the bowels can emerge. Then scrape off the sac that is beneath the skin of the testicles as far as the white sac that is beneath the bladder and between the two sacs; and then move your right hand into the skin of the testicles, with the white sac on top in your left hand, and lift up the testicle to the wound. Then instruct your assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and release what is behind the ligament. And if you find any part of the intestine wrapped around the white sac or beneath it, then push it into the belly below. Next take a needle with ten threads made from four threads, and insert it in the back part of the sac that is after the skin of the testicles. After the incision, cut away the threads that appear as far as there are four threads; then assemble one thread on top of another in the shape of a cross, and tie the sac with a strong ligament of two parts. Then wrap the threads of the fingers around it and tie it firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess forms; and place a ligature on top according to the first long ligature on both sides, and after these two ligatures leave the sac that is beneath the skin of the testicles with a large opening equal to one finger's breadth. And after all this, do similarly to the roundness that the bladder carries; then cut away in the part that is beneath the skin of the testicles as far as it takes to get rid of any remaining dirt and bowels, just as we have said before. Then apply wet linen soaked in oil to the wounds and place a ligature on them, just as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white scrotal membrane that we have said is cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Because this happens many times, and leave the bond until it chooses for itself; and if it delays in falling, then be anointed with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia of flesh
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made as with the grapevine that is wound around the trunk, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after shaping them slightly below; then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels fall; and cure it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	At no time does the hernia come out in anger, as we have said, and it opens up the belly; and none of the intestines go down to the coition, and if some do go down, it is rare, and repair all hours; and yet if it stays too long in this point, the wound or abscess will grow, until the intestine goes down; and this happens through the extension of the abscess which is at the hernia, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and inflated the belly and open up; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the abscessed hernia swollen to the width according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the abscess which is below the skin that ensues, then take the length and put it on top of the abscessed hernia; and press at the bottom of the belly, then sew up the two abscesses appearing from the abscess on the head of the length, and sew one and the other; then extract the head of the length, and do not cut the abscess or stretch the membrane or any other thing, as I have shown you in the cure of the grapevine of the intestines; then cure it with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat sons, if it wounds and cures the wound, so long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scrotal membrane is constricted, and has no appearance in the hernia, and the cauterization is more fruitful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum is softened in some men, because the contents that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and cut off the soft skin above the natural skin; then gather the two lips together into a seam, and if you see, cut off first the superfluous part of the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and treat it as one would other wounds, until he is healed, and the thread falls away.
dou chastrement	of correction or punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisements are ordained in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of them at all in this book; and there is only necessity for two reasons: one is that the apothecary can respond with knowledge when asked about a cure; and the other, because we often have need of chastising certain beasts to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisements are done in two ways: or by attraction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the bones are softened and relaxed; then we take it in our hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastement de taille: instruct to trim the beast, and press the cowhide of the testicles into your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each one on top with a blow, when you have well scratched them; and leave some little point and subtle point which is above the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because at attraction something remains by chance from the testicles, whereby the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one manner is that between the two testicles appears also as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes in shortness it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has above the finger also as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Et the care of man and woman is that you dress all stitched wounds, and care for them as other wounds; in the second manner, those men whose urine jumps through the skin of their groin, have no care.
de la tentigene	Of the tentigenous.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tenting is a stitched wound on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the care.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should remove the excess flesh from the tenting with your hand or pumice stone, and dress it lightly; and don't go too far inwards, lest bloodstains occur, then treat another wound until it is healed; and there is another sore that appears at the mouth of the navel, and spreads, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it the ancient "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to file, as we have said the temperament, and to treat until she is healed.
de erratique	Of the erratic.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	There is error when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the hole is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come upon her; or it is due to a charred joint, or subtle or thick abscess, and it makes a gap in the belly, or sides, or underneath, or whatever; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perchance having flowers again; and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close to the armpits or at the groin.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to subtle abscess and appears close to the ribs, then hasten and do thus: place your two fingers together, and have the woman sit on her back, spread her legs; then press the two ribs firmly until the subtle abscess is drained, and cover the swelling; then take flax, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and have the woman lie down at home each day, so that she cannot bind.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the abscess is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you open it with a spatula-like instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh birth, then suspend it with an onion and a spatula; and have medicines staunching blood, such as aloe, dragon's blood, incense, together with egg whites; then administer a poultice of wool, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be long in doing this, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured by other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes flesh growth, then you must cover it according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an enchanted abscess in the marsh does not allow one to touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Varicose veins are openings of veins which, without a natural cause, become accustomed, and when varicose veins are old they become ulcers; and we have said in the division those similar to them, and their signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I diagnose that hemorrhoids and piles when they are deeply embedded in the flesh and do not sense the feeling, except by iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the opening of the flesh can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then set the piles with forceps, and cut them at their roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and saffron and incense, and similar things; then pour her feet to the bath for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple skin and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make it into a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stagnates, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him take poultices to the back and breasts without causing harm; then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of agaric with old wine, and apply it there.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has settled, then care for the area of ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a sharp head, so you must cover it as I said earlier; and then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the apostemes of the womb.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the marriage, such as chances and stone abscesses and herpetic sores and carbuncles and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the marriage, which is not one of the abscesses that are cold; and if you want to know the work of fire, so look whether the abscess is full of heat and fever at its beginning, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then don't hasten to puncture, but let the pain subside as much as possible; and then make the patient sit on a siege, and have two small sieges or it inclines, and support it on its back and assemble its feet towards the part of the leg; and let its hips be spread apart, and put its arms underneath its knees, and bind them well with a good cord; then succeed in placing the ballister towards the right costal area, and administer the instrument for working on the mouth of the marriage bed, from which comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being administered, you place the first line inside so as to know the depth of the marriage bed, so that what enters into the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marriage bed with drapes, so that the instrument does not cause pain to the patient; and it is necessary that it places the horn of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess opens and one makes a poultice with moist herbs by hand, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth at the head, on the shoulder-blade. And when the bowstring is empty, it is necessary that you put damp cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil in the wound; and place the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the marshy area, and place above it on the marshy area a clean moist cloth wrapped around a fish or herbs cooked in water. Then treat afterwards two days after anointing as needed until it is healed; and sometimes lift up the bandage and the wound with a mixture of water and honey, and then with water or long-cooked lily roots and aristolochia.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered in the marshy area, it is necessary that you beware of burning with iron, but care for it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, and the signs if is when you see the woman approaching downward, and desiring to smell the air: then hastens forth the infant with great force; then know that this birth is according to natural form, and the issue below its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the infant issues quickly; for when it descends above its head, the secondine goes with it, and the wife is freed from its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes under its feet, and comes forth violently through the body or head, or hands; or it comes above her belly, or so often, and is converted by chance upon her neck, and by other bad figures; thus it is necessary for the woman to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must assist it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant emerges above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have the women hold her; and arise her nature from oil or fenugreekic be cooked, and then pour the balm between her breasts the small spatula-like thing which is its shape.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	et fende la secondine, and cut the umbilical cord, and cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; and take hold of the child's wrist as long as the afterbirth is being expelled; and preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, and press the woman's belly until the child descends; and s'il ne dessent, if it doesn't descend, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; then it is necessary to purge the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, and make her hold her breath and strain herself; and tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l'enfes. and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: so the child will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out too far, it is necessary that you gently bring them back in place bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet high; then set the stool down on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the blade that was previously placed, and extract the child, and bring it back into place equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the exit of the child onto his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto his feet, if it needs to be raised upwards; and then turns it little by little, until it is even; then takes one foot and stretches it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can he jump just to the hips, if it is commanded to stop, and make him excrete with condiments; if he jumps further, may God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he is not forth as we have said, then turn him bit by bit until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is so slightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he doesn't come further as we have said, take mustard from above, and oil of sambucus, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in cold water up to under the ribs; and when she is moist underneath, apply a collar of myrrh and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a siege, then make her excrete and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, because the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From childbirth of the infant on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then put the ball of your hands on it little by little; then cover it with its collar, and let the feet hang down below, and be seated above on the bed; and fold your hands little by little, and then take your hands off from the belly, and remove the cushions underneath until it is prepared below; and if the child does not jump, then take its feet and shape it properly, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in; and thus treat the child little by little; and command the woman to take hold as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From childbirth of the infant which emerges with one arm stretched out
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the bed, and take off her legs properly; then administer the ointment that I have told you about; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and thus treat the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch out, and command her to take hold as long as the child comes out further.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From childbirth of the infant on its neck, with spread arms and face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	The bail should hold its hand, then turn it little by little and the eye lightly; and when it is even, so put upon the natural muscle-like of aloes and oil, as we have said, then command that it move little by little; and when you will have done this, so make it sit on a siege, and command that it takes hold; and make it stretch.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes in this way to the entire second joint, so cut the second joint at your finger, until the moisture is emptied; and if the child peeks out its face and neck, then cut off from the belly, that it be not retained, and kill the child; then put the infant inside, as long as you have done so, and as it seems fitting, and command the woman to take hold sometimes: then it will move lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From childbirth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born sometimes, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens bit by bit.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live anymore, unless they be named; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the syphilis which divides them, which is linked to the mouth; and sometimes they issue naturally like all others below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue suddenly, as we have said, and the cure is subtle, and does quickly and easily what it does; and does so as it is worthy to move towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all fashioned in the form of an infant by the measurement of glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, for similar things often befall him; so do according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman after the stillborn child or miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to perform manual work; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health, and she has no accident or fear of death; if it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the servant should hold the cloth of two parts, or attach it to the bed so that she does not receive the descent of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oils blended with muskadel and fenugreek and flaxseed; then oil the bail's hands with these oils and these blending agents; then pour them into the mother lightly, then take heed if the child is appeased as it descends onto its head; then place the onces in her eyes or on her neck or mouth or in her palace or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if the descent is at the feet, then place or pinch them along the sides; and it is necessary that you hold the onces in your right hand, and put the corbeure between your left hands, and pour it all over your hand lightly, and place the once in one of these places that we said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the onces:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then pin against the other once, or if you have a third available, make sure the extractions are equal; and then stretch equally by moving from one side to the other, so that it may come out, and the once's teeth will hold by moving, as is its form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, then anoint the ball with some of its two ointments of oil, and pour it into that part, and draw out the other part; and if none remains, then place this once or more above it, and do so until all comes forth.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back because of constraint, then you must wrap around the covering so that all comes out; then cut at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the movement is light, and the directing to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is bent to the belly or chest, so it is necessary that you straighten him with a cloth wrapped around his hand on top of it; and make the belly or chest, until the moistures that are there dry up; and if other members are removed, and the head remains, then push the ball with your hand as far as the mouth of the marris, and treat it up to the mouth of the marris; then put in one or two, and treat it further; and if the mouth of the marris is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then you should not bother, but rather administer moist and greasy things; and the administrator applies poultices, and takes care in watery, softening, and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side and you can put him equal, then administer what we have said to the living child; and if one cannot do so, then treat it further in parts, and leave nothing of the sequel.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the patient is brought to you with abscesses that come in marriage; and if there is bleeding from the dressing, it should be restrained by water, and other remedies given.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had been dead in the womb, then she consulted another doctor on top of that, and the other doctor rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to the mouth of the womb, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great disturbance.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied an ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to heal the wound, and I took care of the bone with my hands until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and would occasionally have a little pus come out from there; and I do not remember this chapter being written except that when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to apply aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the joint back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of the preserver, by which we preserve books; and at the second turning to the second joint of the two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be two hands wide, and the edges of the trees one and a half palms long; and between the two combs there should be two joinings of this same fist, which are tightened on both sides, five and a half palmed long or a little more; and these two joinings are inserted into the mouth of the marriage to open when you turn the two combs.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made to its likeness more subtle and lighter, shall be made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of forceps; and it shall have two handles, as you see, a palm's length long, and two inches wide; and when you see open the mouth with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the lit, her feet pendant and legs outstretched, then thrust the two handles together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with forceps evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the instrument, until the ball makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted, and their shapes are multiplied; and when the makers have prepared them, then is the work more hasty, and higher in price for men according to their quality.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her exhale with some effort, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she suffocates because of this, well be.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, I take the potion, and make a pit or coverlet, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a cord or pit around the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and tie it so that the vapors come inside the womb; then make it pour out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine comes forth quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure and is not fully recovered, instruct the nurse to wet her left hand with sesame oil or with muskadelic of althea, and then put it in its nature, and wait for the secondine; and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it out little by little straightly, so that the womb does not hurt during the extraction; but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull; and thus it will come and settle.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Et if the mouth of the mother is very narrow, we have said the cure of poultice, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, then beware that you do not fail to take action; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mother, you tie to the hips of the woman, then catheterize her with tetra-pharmaceutical ointment; thus she will pass and be restored, and come forth; but nonetheless, when she passes so there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have proven that fumigation with cress and dried figs is effective.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument by which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is necessary to look like a chain, and put the head subtly in its natural state, and the joints wide over the fire; and be the fumigations above the coals, and comb until she is worn out, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane: so then at birth, she should pierce that membrane to its due place, and not let it be pierced by a sharp instrument, and secure the ligament so it does not touch; then put a moist linen cloth in vinegar and oil, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not close, then put or make a perforation in a piece of cloth, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And whenever this swelling comes from sudden wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that swelling: then be cured, as we have said of the cloth wrapping.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that come from beneath the fundament are nodulation, and growing more that come from below the fundament to disappear; or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture, white or subtle broth, and sometimes these fistulas perish; and they are known by the fact that there is either egestion or ventosity when the patient makes egestion, and happens to spit up something.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the groin junction, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula is persisting at the fundament, and not persisting: and it is that you thrust your two index fingers or fundament into the fistula, and thrust a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twistiness, then you thrust a thin cloth or a horse's hair into the fistula, as far as your finger can feel the cloth or hair; and if you do not feel it, and there is no opening to egestion or ventosity or vermin, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing just to the bladder or just to the channel of urine, if the urine jumps out and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just to the joint of the crack, then the tender comes just to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around, then it stays thus bound, and there is no remedy nor binding by ointment; and in these abscesses there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not yet pus-filled and is not yet old, there is hope for recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and have their hips inclined towards their belly; then put a tent of earth or leather if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tender comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should put your two fingers there, and if you sense that the tender has pierced; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the scrotum or flesh, then know that it is pus-filled; and do not work on it at all, for one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On dist toutevoie c’on peut bien saner aucun mais ce avient peu et li aide c’on i fait si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule si com il est devant dit et le boute tout chaud en la fistule tant qu’il vienne delez le fondement et faice cela deux fois ou trois tant que tu saiches que ces charres fautrees soient arses qui sont semblables à une pennes d’oiseau et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre tant que celle charre est sortie puis le cure d’huile en janrant char et soudant.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And if that is not so, it cannot be healed in any other way; and if the abscess bursts inside, and does not pierce all the way to the foundation, and there is a thick covering of pus or pus-filled sac between your skin and the abscess, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering is peeled away from the key; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward before the abscess, and afterwards apply the cautery until it reaches the top of the abscess; and the abscess will be delivered, and will burst forth; then scrape off those charred remains that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood vainly swells and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine as needed.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the fire cautery assembles two things: that is to say, the burning of these charred sticks, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of damp tents or in hollowed-out brooms, until the joints gush forth, and then remove the burned char from the joint; then cure the wound of ointments following a sudden hardening of skin, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the very bottom of the fundament, and is removed from the body, then bind your two fingers or fundament, and inspect it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent, and between two is the cloth or the sac or charred sticks, where it is near to piercing, if there are no fires but only a path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut all the way down to the foundation, or if possible, place tents and cure as before; and do not go too deep in order not to cover the tenant that holds the foundation, and thus bring forth eliminations against will; then cure it as we have said; by chance, if it is healed, remove that covering and mold it down below the foundation, whether by tent or other appointed instrument; then mend the faulty char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to leave the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation beneath the skin above, so take a piercing tent with a head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bind one twisted thread into two, and bind the cloth to all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is placed on the edge of the foundation within, then take out the thread from that perforation, so as you push your finger or foundation; and straighten the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and then restrain it sometimes, until the filaments that are between two become loose and fall out; then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far down.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make a hole cut so deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spine-like spodium that one makes into a fistula is very uneven on one side and trenching; and on the other side not, because of which those things are not cut that should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small ones and great ones, and in the middle, blood is flowing, and there is one or more, and those that are outside the foundation have little moisture, and in the midst of it, a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is to command the patient to strain by lifting up his chambers until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear; if you hasten, take out the entrails with forceps, or hold it at your finger, then cut into its roots; and if the ligaments cannot hold due to their moistures, take them up in a cloth, or in cotton, or in a piece of camelot; and extract them from both sides, then cut, and powder with some warm powders that are used for cauterization; or you can cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cauterization, and cure other cures until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a bitter and harsh purgative to wash what is within the foundation, so that it may come forth openly.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit du large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noie le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de tous les autres, et en laisse un pour corre la superfluité du sang; puis met sus le fondement un drapeau mouillé en oïle roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et commande au malaide qu’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sains.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the suppuration of the wound or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is suppuration of wounds in the intestine, and due to natural constraint, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape to the tip of a spatula or your fingernail above, which does not let it moisten; then care for it until it is solid as it requires; and if it cannot become solid, then start scraping again stronger than before, until it heals somewhat, and is scraped away; then care for it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formication is a small, faulty appearance outside the body, and goes deep inside; and at no time does it find frost, and one feels it just like being cold-shaken to death, and comes throughout the entire body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a piece of goose quill or a strong peacock feather, and place it on the fremit, until the purple circles encompass the fremit entirely; then turn your hand around the entire quill as much as possible around the fremit, and put it deep inside, and tear out the fremit from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make those of a copper or iron quill according to this form, and be subtle beneath and trailing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	not to pierce, but to keep it at the two and to press; And if you see, then cauterize the formication, as is written or said in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or archaute, or melted and malleable copper; and sometimes one makes those small and great instruments, according to the way they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and great clyster is above large, or the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	et it has an obstruction or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and it has on one side two perforations, and on the other one; and the belly or pouch holds medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small perforations, and has between each perforation one measure of space, then pour in these perforations one piece of strong twisted thread, ten times or so around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then purify; and that's the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg yolk or similar thing, then insert it slightly; then have the attendants press with both hands together until it is completely full, then remove the catheter, and lift the patient's legs up to the ceiling, and if the medicine wishes to come out, so hold it as long as it can; and if it sleeps one night too much, it will be greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize in the disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as many times as necessary until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, so be it also subtle as in a child; and that is the form of the subtle cyst above which the skin is strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and now we will say the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with stone, and the shape of a sword and knife, or lance or club or bowstring or arrow, or similar things; or that are done according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from cutting with stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt lightly of a hot abscess: so make it heal with cephalic medicine at once, even if there is little blood from the wound, and be the medicine contrary to the damaged part; and let the patient's repletion be of wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si'il ne veut sainir, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sur la plaie, si apostemes chau i vient, coton moilliet en oile rose, soulement, ou en vin stiptique; et si'il n'y a aposteme chaud, si met sus la plaie, s'elle est fresche à tout son sang, et elle n'est muee par l'air, poudre, que je dirai un peu ci après; et si li ars l'a muee, si met sus aux oignemens, tant qu'il soit sainiz.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stretching, then bring them together by stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and is deep, and only holds together by a small amount, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh in place of soft skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like pullets, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a purulent boil, and it is not at the bone, then cut out the boil entirely, and throw away the pus, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then tie off the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which unites just as much as fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of living coal, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine as long as it is unhealed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with coal alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only if fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the boil has moved the wound, just as it is situated, then do not put on this powder; but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour and water with honey, until it runs clear; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about skull fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the cure alone and not apply anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them recoil; and do not put cold things on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be careful with medicines, as if one were washing in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and then washing it again in sweet water, and other stones of similar kind, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, then bind it with cloth and tie with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	Et si les plaies sont parfondes et elle est chevee et pleine de boue, si la perce ou plus bas leu;
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife and the wound is deep, then see if there are symptoms of festering that cause the patient to redden: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it within the first hour nor bind it tightly for the blood that does not congeal in the depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but rather put attractive ointment on it, and bind it two times a day; and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and make the patient sleep on top of the wound for three days, or four, or more; then it will not come spasms, nor bad trembling from alarm; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Then cure the wound and other cures, until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, and labor, then know that there is a fistula; so cure it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then cure what is in front of it; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and there are broken pieces, then let the wound be, and treat the affected parts; and if they are not affected, then let the wound suppurate, so that the extractions will ease; and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruptions of the belly are great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes an intestine or the intestines will burst open, by which the introduction of pus occurs; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, because one must put the intestines back in slowly, lest they go back in all at once; for when the intestines feel the cold, they swell and go back in slowly, and that is why the medium-sized wound is best, because one puts the intestine back in its place more easily. And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners: two common sutures occur with the suture of the belly, and two other sutures proper for other wounds are also common; and although they are more suitable with the suture of the belly, I will say each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the wound is small and nothing from the intestines flows forth and there is no great issue to remedy, it can be done by one of two methods: or because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm him thus: soak a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook in hot water with cypress, spikenard, and squinny, and apply the intestine until the swelling is gone; and sometimes make it reappear, and it will be sufficient to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with hot or lukewarm water, for it is constricted at the entrance to a small opening; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for bleeding; and the first cure is more important than the cutting, that no one should cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument to use: if you cut within the curvature and do not cut too much, and see how it takes shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, so reset it to its natural form in its own proper place, if you are able, for this is a move.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, so you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and breast higher than the parts below, and likewise if the injury of the belly is in one of the two parts, set your attention to what I say about great wounds and bandages.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Place what is on you, then take a pitous minister who holds all the wound in his hand and assemble the edges; and this is the common manner of stitching, that is to say, you take one or more needles, according to the quantity of the wound's largeness, then leave a space of two fingers' breadth from the wound's head, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce the two holes of the leather with the two holes of the siphac, which is below the leather inside, until you make it pierce on that part, and assemble the two ends of the siphac together; then strain one double thread around the needle for two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound together, and then leave a space of two fingers' breadth, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to your need of needles, until all the wound is restrained; and be the needles moderate, between subtle and thick, for subtle needles cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot well enter: therefore it is necessary that they be moderate; and do not stick the needles too far into the flesh and leather, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suturing; then clip the needle's holes so they do not bother the patient at night, and put tents or cloths on the needle's holes to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is sutured; and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to use one or two; the second stitch is common, and is that you assemble the two leather edges and the two siphac edges together on a needle that has a moderate strong thread; and when you have pierced all these holes together, then remove the needle from the part where you began, as one sews cloth; and leave a space of the thickness of a smaller finger between each stitch; this stitch is known to men, and I stitched a wound that had been on a man's belly, which was wounded with a knife, and was more than a palm in size, and his intestines were two palms in size, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines when they had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was healed in just 15 days, and I cured it, and he became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the barber had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where we could not find any, nor any medicines; and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he became well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and push it through from outside to inside the part; when it has pierced the skin in straight lines, then place the head of the siphac or sewing thread where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side of the inside part to the outside; and the understanding of this suturing is that you sew as the fuller makes fur, and leave once one end loose and take up the other, until the suturing is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which Galen calls specifically, is such that certain people do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the chief ends of the silk to the other chief end, in this way: fix an awl or chief point of the mirror nearby, and make it pierce only that spot, and leave the two chiefs of the silk; then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outer part just to the inner one, at the two chiefs of the silk; then make it pierce both of them from the outer part just to the inner one, in two other points of the mirror that are on the other side; and this is the more important manner of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some testify to it, so one must sew the belly with two awls, each having thread; and one should push one awl from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew leather; and know that when there is a rupture within the belly, then the sewing is more difficult than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: and is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, then it is moved by fire, so put in the intestine, and the cloth; then put on powder inviting flesh, and if the fire has moved it, put on some ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and trim the thread, and tighten the stitches, and the bandages; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to close, a piece of old cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in many simple wound dispositions; and if you doubt that the wound will cause community to the main members, then it is necessary for you to moisten light linen in tempered heat oil or rose oil, and put it around the pangs, and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or purulence in the bowels, and it often happens, then purge him with black wine vinegar, and likewise if the purulence comes just to the intestine; and poke inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the firmness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approaching nature of its kind to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the artery jumps out of the wound, put it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become white or black, then you must tie the part that is black, so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two ends hang down from the part below the wound until the artery falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people, because I saw a man wounded with a lance in his belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from there was coming the evacuation and flatulence; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to refine it until he was healed, and the stitches were sewn.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw him sutured, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be tied in this manner: take fresh figs, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the figs have opened the mouth, put them on the two lips so that his mouth stays open; and then cut off the head, and it will remain such that he cannot unfasten it; then put another fig after in this manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed; and dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	That head if it is sewn in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of this thread from the intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the end of this thread another thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the route; and this manner of sewing with figs is not far removed from the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it inflames, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it breaks out and runs backwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the greenish nodation of faulty and white flesh, where one does not feel pain, and it bursts out like a bird's feather; and sometimes it runs clear and bright, and at other times thick and dense; sometimes little, and at other times sufficient; and I have spoken earlier in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh left, is only due to one of the nine causes: namely, due to the weakness of blood or body; or due to its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to form; or there is too much discharge; or the limb is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or due to the property of the region being slow in digestion, and slow in healing, and flowing by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistula which is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula occurs in all members of the body; for it is fistulas that come to great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sacrum, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so too does one come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are grievous to heal, and there is nothing but hard work, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come just up to what I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, then take a tent of iron or clay, if the fistula is straight, then cut it; and if the fistula is bent, then search for a subtle tent of cloth, because the cloth will bend around the tortuousness; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the holes, because the moisture runs short from one hole to another, and purifies; then let blood as much as you know, whether there is bone or nerve, and is cut open in the middle, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where it is; and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a jointure, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the false flesh and corrupted humors that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well purged from its right place, then cut open deep, as much as you can, then put moist tents in medicine, and pour them just up to the head of the fistula, so long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments in healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If vein or nerve does not grieve or principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so let it rest until all corruption is gone, then cure of things in the char will make it whole again; and if it is not whole, and returns to its former state, know that you are not yet at the end: uncover and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus whole, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep in the bone, that you cannot approach it; if there is no other remedy than to rely on nature; and if there is a little corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with pincers, then pull it out with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and scrape and char, and deliver the bone.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, so put on the wound a poultice allowing for purging, and leave until the pus is formed around the bones, and then they will have more easily the bones; and if it is a large bone, such as that of the leg or hip, so restore only the corruption until all the mortification is gone, then treat the wound; and if there is a great part of the corrupted flesh, and comes to the very edge of the bone; so it must be cleansed and covered up to the corruption, and then cure until it is sound; and I will tell you about an abscess that happened to a man in his leg, so take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came to the leg and became swollen with a large abscess, and he did not have any reason to open it; but the doctors by their foolishness worked on it for so long that the abscess opened up, and much matter flowed out, and became a fistula, and there were many passages that all drained bowels and moisture from the body; and many doctors put treatment around two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the passages into great abundance; and the young man's body became red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I tented one of these hollows, and then searched all the hollows, and found that some came together on both sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and probed one of the hollows until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it to be rotten and perforated, and the rot extended right up to the bone inside; I saw what appeared from the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except for what I had removed; and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but couldn't heal it; then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the rot continued in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and thought of suturing the place; but I didn't get that far until I probed around one palm's width from the bone, and brought it all the way to its full length, then treated it with medicines; and it was healed quickly, and there was no need to continue the work except for the patient's weakness, which couldn't bear it, and due to my fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the blood evacuation it often bled frequently, but it was whole and sound, and instead of bone there grew a hard skin, and it was in good condition and had no harm or contrariety from anything at all, neither to go nor come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set in this way: take one strap and stretch it to the tip of the exposed bone; and have someone else hold it in place from above; and tie another strap made of coarse linen on top of the skin that is over the bone, and steady the tip so that you can pull out the rotten flesh below, and uncover the healthy skin above where you want to see; so that the setting does not damage the skin; and put a heated iron or a wooden splint under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and it must be set as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a middle or part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron underneath, and then reveal the corruption from one part to another, and be sure to take it as long as possible from the corruption I mentioned; and if the corruption is in the jointure, then cut the corrupted jointure, and be on the other side of the bone or its continuation; and if the corruption is at the finger tip of the hand or the foot, then it is very strong, but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion how it appears to you; and clean it up in all ways that you can, but let not the vein or nerve give you trouble; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, or by cause defuer; and when you have medicine that cures this corrosion by the treatment of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member until the point where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes death, either from the mortality, which is greater, due to the default of the member; and the signs are such that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards pus comes forth, and then this corrosion spreads from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body; so hasten to cover, and if it is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, and if the corruption is at the head of the foot, then cut it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of his virtue; and thus do when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, then cut the entire foot; and if it mounts to the leg, then cut at the knee joint; and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy except that the patient dies; and the manner of cutting or soaping the member is this: you bind it above and below, and stretch one servant down one cord and another servant up another cord, and you strip away the flesh which is between the two cords to a span wide, until the bone is uncovered; then cut or soap, and put a cloth of linen on each side, so that the soap does not touch the healthy skin and brings another lesion and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the wound quickly, or put some restraining powders on top; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my care: he had a black ulcer that seemed like a fiery burn, and this corrosion came first on his foot, so much so that it consumed the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and long after, the same corrosion occurred on the thumb of his hand, and he came to me, and I put some reflexive things on him after the purging of the body, but he could not stop the corrosion; and he thought that I should amputate his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repercuting the matter; and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the virtues of the man were weak; and he became desperate altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have told this story only because one makes another worse when one has need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Abscesses come to boil in a hard nut, and remain so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they burst and perforate, and the pus jumps forth, and remains the hollowed-out nut, just as with vellum skins; and the skin above is as subtle as delicate drapes, and does not reach to the bone or the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain", and are not called "fistula"; but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone by the front, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is what you scrape off the skin all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just as with drapes; and it does not appear for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in the front, and the skin is thick with flesh, so treat it with a clyster made thus: look if the breasts are large, and the pus that comes out has a foul odor, then use the Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of aloes, oil, and litharge, and mix them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and thick like honey; then take as much of this mixture as you need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and use it to purge the breast and close the fistula; let the medicine remain for two hours, then drain it by squeezing; do this many times until the breasts are cleansed and the pus is gone; sometimes one uses ash water when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from a vine trunk, pour water on top, let it flow, and use it to purge; as long as you know the breasts are well cleansed; and if the patient cannot endure the medicine or the ash water, then use water and honey with a little litharge mixed in; or purify with honey and wine, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the skin heal; and when you have done this, and you are confident that the breasts are well cleansed, then treat it with emplastrum definitivum, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments whose properties I have described in my treatment of ointments; and if the fistula on the breast is small, and the clyster cannot enter, so enlarge it a little with a ferret and apply an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, then cover it and leave only the opening of the clyster to enter, and if the fistula that pours pus is above, so cut or lower it down so that it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in abundance, do not let them linger inside; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, prepare it in such a way that the bowels run to their lowest point which is; for when the bowels are abundant, do not let them linger inside and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, prepare it in such a manner: that the bowels flow gently downward and leave nothing of the bowels; and take consolidative medicines to place on the skin, and put a cloth of linen that covers the entire skin; then cut with force at the point where the breast is a little larger than before, and anoint softly on another cloth according to the size of the puncture, and place it on the puncture of the skin to lighten the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the puncture of the breast, often removes in order to remove the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or indigested; and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in this manner and you see the nature that springs up on the puncture of the skin, know that the wounds are already healing, and approaching health; then free it in the morning, or the third day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the anointing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested bowel after many days, knows that the breast is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all about health, for the healings approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And there are people who put too much fat in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigestible bile jumps out of the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healthy; and if the breasts take long to heal and are swollen, then combine medicines with moist substance and dry virtue, as defined by ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine; take ointment defined, and mix it with rose oil, and equal amount of old wine in substance; then cook it and use it; and do the same with honey boiled in growth, when ointment defined is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder on the honey when it is over fire; then glue I drapeling, and put it on the breast, and sometimes administer aristologe long, and roots of celestial lilies, which is like fine flour and centaurry; and use simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has entered deeply, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments; so the cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the joint
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is a boil that grows under the finger web of the hand, or under the toe, or by chance occurs in other places; and when it is envellied, and one does not take care, so the boil bursts forth, and runs and flows down as long as it can reach the root of the boil, and by chance it reaches all the way; and comes to corrosion right up to the bone, until there comes a foul pain, and are the joints of the toe wide apart, and is the color fiery.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity that remains of the boil, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the finger is healthy; and if the finger presses against the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, then it is necessary that you put the rod underneath the pricking finger, and push it up, and cut away the pricked flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines in order to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et if the decay is in the bone, so hack it out, and trim away, for as long as the bone is decaying there, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint decaying, so cut into it at the point where we said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is infected, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so be sure to heal it first; then cut out the ulcers of the spatula's knife by cutting across above, and take care that the cutting does not come all the way to the flesh which is beneath the ulcers, for the patient would feel too great a pain; and if there is, place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is sometimes a bone or it has a bone, and sometimes there is an ulna, and one of them is born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil who is born in any notch of the elbow does not move, and he who is born at the jointure of the elbow by chance moves; the stature of one who is fat so is light, in this manner: his stature is in its root like a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if you take it to be cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or should be at the rear notch, it is necessary that you scrape off the flesh to just below the bone, then scrape the bone with a suitable thread for that, then heal it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you scrape off the weld, and then repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you can put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the limb is healed, just as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to any of his hands with the palm, then cover that swelling as it should be.
des vils	of evil things
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Venous veins are large and swollen, full of superfluous melancholic fluids, which come to more members of the body; and it happens most in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer to him occasional purging with vinegar, and then heal with the oil of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you scrape and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The surgery is done in this manner: first, arise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned, then restrain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then lift and draw out the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood issues as the virtues of the patient can endure; and then tie it up, and command that they eat nourishing foods allowing black stool; and recommence evacuation and purging when the veins are full, and is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: Raise the patient's leg if it has many hairs, then put it in water and let it soak until the veins swell; and if you don't have water, warm it by the fire and then cut into the vein at the long part of the thigh or below the knee; then scrape away the skin around each vein until it feels like a taut string; and see that it is red and black, and when it goes into the skin it seems like a white cord; then put the thread underneath, so that it rises out of the skin, and then gently pull it to the next thread; and cut another length, or as many times as you need, then lift it and cut again at the ankle bone; then drag and lift just up to the second length; then draw it from length to length until it is all loose, then cut; and if you cannot draw and lift, put a needle on all strong double thread, and lift and draw, and put underneath the thread, and turn your hand this way and that, so long as it comes out; and take care not to cut, because if it cuts, one cannot draw or lift, and harm comes to the patient; and when you have drawn it all out, put a damp cloth on top of the wound in wine and olive oil ointment; and cure until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and looped together, and it's not straight, as we have said, so you must cut it obliquely, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one coppers the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it opens up the vein; and is a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inserted in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms arise between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this flux are that a very great inflammation comes to the leg, then the swelling changes shape and the flux begins to issue forth, just as a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the swelling opens up, it's necessary that you wrap a piece of cloth around one and a half to two times, and tie it off, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time it goes away from the front, you wrap it again around the cloth, and tie it off; and if it's too long, you cut off part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and don't cut it at its root until it's completely gone; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and bring about abscesses and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease; therefore it's necessary that it be treated gradually up to the top, and none remains in the body; and sometimes this flux is when it's treated from five or ten fingers long, or even one man came to me who had it come out of ten finger-lengths long, and when you cut it, you push a reed or a pike through, and it goes all the way down until everything comes out; and then the material inside is emptied, and medicines are administered to prevent putrefaction some day, and then the cure takes place just as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at this point many streams flow, and indeed especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or the foot itself, and a great deal of pus comes out, and then there are many streams; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often attacks oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and one feels it well from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and then bursts; and it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, warts, and ascarides in the belly; and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may happen that it enters and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and moving, one can't help but wait until it goes: so it is necessary that you bind the area above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike up and pull it through, and if the pus is poured deeply into the flesh, and you don't find it, then cauterize it with fire above, until it dries; and the greatest harm it causes, it is that it flows to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, so bind below it a bandage tightly, then strike up, and pull it through; and it is necessary to use the patient of purifying medicine solutions for bad humors, and be wary of foods that cause putridity.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and later on, I saw it rise also like a worm on the shoulder, even sooner than anything else, like vivid silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain departed from that place and took hold in the shoulder, and then a little while after it ran throughout the body until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was turning again around the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease move like that before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had always thought that pain would move from one place to another, but I did not see it so in the woman; and I thought to myself that it was because the woman's body was dry, and her veins uncovered, and for this reason appeared this constrained manifestation; and do not appear according to this reason to those who are plump, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to healing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then bind above and below quickly, and then cut on top until constrained by the ventosities returns to its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those who counteract ventosities, such as fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their kinds is that there are those with large points, small ones, and hooked ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that hits a member so hits in two ways: or in principal members such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, and li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t'aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l'estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t'aperent mie, and li saiette n'est mie em parfont, si la trai, and cure la plaie.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the skull above the brain jumps, is when there is numbness and dullness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixing of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it's without further pain from the nose or ears; and perhaps the speech and voice are impaired; and a jump of white moist plaque resembling pustules, and also jumping like a charred ember; and if these signs appear, then beware of the cure, and extract the arrow if it's not too late.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it falls into the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow also moves like hair, and comes out with cold black blood, and brings chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting: thus know without doubt that the dying person will perish.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that does not leave the spleen is when without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes high and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits the covering of the liver, it is below the small ribs; and it vomits great gall and great pain and breathes hard; and all the muscles of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth a piece of feces through the intestine's route, there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the face and shoulders and neck and shoulder and aid of the back and spine and coccyx and heel and legs, and similar members, are safe according to several conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow fell into the tear duct at the root of his nose: I tried it, and led it out on the other side under the fatty earlobe, and he was cured without inflammation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I led out an arrow that had fallen into the fatty part of the eye under the eyelids, and the arrow was bent, and could not be grasped except by its tip, and it was a great Turkish bow, easily removable without ears; the game was cured, and no bad consequences came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And draw out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears; I pulled out the beard, and made it subtler until I drew it out, and the Christian became healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And draw out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought he would die; and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and bound it, and drew it out, and there was no bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if the arrow falls on a man's back, and the wound is sewn up above; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural disposition, nor causes harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And saw another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sewn up; and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And draw out an arrow from the king's home, which was stuck in the child, and was slightly declining to the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged. I was summoned for the treatment after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I searched for it with a fine thread and couldn't find it; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put a poultice on the wound to attract and digest, because the swelling wasn't increasing; and the wound of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the poultice on for several days and the wound healed above again, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his belly; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound by hand for several days, until it was open and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was sticking at the spot; then I made an incision in the opening of the wound with that medicine, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it went well beyond three months, and then broke out so much that I inserted forceps, and pried it open from one side and the other, and could not get through; then I did not cease to subtilize and to ingeniously use various instruments, until I grasped the forceps well made after a day, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored; I then restored it, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or t'ai dit la qualité de l'extraction d'aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne peut mie tout comprendre; mais li sages maîtres apperçoivent sur bien petit chose, et sur ceu que li est présent et faible, trouvez une œuvre, et neuve instrument, au dessous des choses étranges qui arrivent en cet art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are fixed except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which jumps out on the other side where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it like that until the flesh is thoroughly surrounded and the exit is cleared; and similarly, if it's fixed in the bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move each day; and then it will jump out, and if it doesn't, then make a small incision all around with a very fine instrument, until the surrounding flesh is stretched out, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull and goes just up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said occur to the patient: do not pull it out at all, but let it remain equal after a few days, because if the arrow comes up to this point, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come up to this point, and the patient remains some days without a bad accident, then he should be taken away from pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very deeply and cannot come out at all, then administer poultices around, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is repositioned in its place within the body and cannot be seen, then search everywhere for it. And if you find it, pull it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut away as much as the wound allows; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears where it is stuck, remove the flesh that is stuck for two parts in proportion to what you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and take care not to break the arrow more than you would have.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the flesh around is rotten, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Et if the bleeding makes you contrary, so apply what we have said in its chapter about treatment; and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and think how you can draw out the arrow without danger, whether soon or late, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form it was when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, so apply as signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from the other side, if it is not clear what is done to it, or the skin is swollen in the area and can be seen or felt abnormally: cut then on top, as far as the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and start the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is any part of the arrow left in, soak it completely with oil; and if the arrow falls, and you are to administer treatment, then administer an instrument with a rough surface, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push forward, and if the arrow is pulled out, then insert the instrument with its pointed end entering first, in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then cure the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits or falls in the head, breast, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close, and you can get to it, then cut around it; and beware of cutting into a vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then cut the wound, if necessary; and take care of it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which we treat arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like a bird's feather, in order to pierce to the point of the arrow, as this is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps for pushing and for knowing if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins for healing, and among these are 16 in the head, to wit: two batons that are after the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of both eyes, which are called "aspires"; and one vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and one vein that is at the crown of the head; and the two grooves that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips below the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used for healing are two in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side, and is called by common folk "vein of the head"; and the median vein is also called "faste", composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and is called by common folk "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and is called by common folk "vein of the belly"; and it lies above the fascia, and that one is used for healing, which is manifestly visible above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salvatelle is the vein that is between the wrist and ankle, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is located under the pocket of the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the forehead vein is worth as much as the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and in migraine and in headache; and the qualities are such that the patient stretches his neck twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fossor", whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and press down with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein so it is sealed and at no time does a wide flame appear.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the inflammation be too great; and the vein heals across, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the inflammation when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps the eyes, and the tinea, and the headache, and the orbital inflammation in the eye, and old diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient stretches his neck twisting without any binding, just as before; then bleed, and let the blood be like a thread, a little long, a little wide, for there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break; then make the blood flow, until you need it to stop, and then bind with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, and to sode forsenee, and to maladies of faice, as emigraine and roujor that comes in the faice, and similarly when it is anciene; and li qualitez de la sainie si est that the malaides estrigne his col, then estrain his neis to ta main senestre, and pren lou flaime subtil long, and le fiche emmi la levre in l’espaice which is between the II narines, for li voinne does not open well there, and li sans will begin now to flow; and do not go too much further in by font, and make flow the blood according to ta necessiteit, then let it lie one night, for it is very soon restored; and that is the form of the blood.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two veins helps with the constriction of the artery, and at the beginning of ulceration, and in many diseases, and in impotence, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and in swellings; and the quality of the blood is that the patient strains his neck above one and the other, as we said; and let the master be standing on the chief of the patient, and the patient sit on a siege, then open the vein of the long one somewhat widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then do another side in the other vein, then release the tie, and hold back the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the sickness of leprosy
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding from the veins above the lips helps to cure mouth ulcers, and corrupt gums, and lip cracks, and around the navel.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the signs of leprosy are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I said; then turn his lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be known by the fact that they are black, and by the small black lines around them: cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, so cut the thicker one from each side, and likewise make the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the sickness beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The sickness of the veins that are beneath the tongue is like after the sickness of the cephalic, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and with the diseases of the eye, and with the diseases of the mouth; and the signs of the sickener are that the patient will sit between your hands in front of the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look beneath each side one black vein: cut then one and the other, and do not go too far down, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	Veins of the neck which are commonly healed are healed in two manners: either piercing with a broad mint leaf or olive oil as finely cut, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad and fine according to the breadth and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the bleeding is well-known, and is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the smooth veins filled with thick blood that is apparent, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the form of olive oil.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilica's vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and around the neck, and around the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the doctor to bleed it gently and to beware of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is cut and blood comes forth in a flow, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and one must not pierce with the olive oil, but rather slice as with anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary to extract it, and change another one; or you want any opening of it, or you make a vein in place of it in the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut on the skin above, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the location of the vein, then it is necessary also that you extract the arm, so that you touch the location until you recognize the pulsation; then mark the location with ink, and bind the arm, and make a cut on the skin above the flame; and take care not to hit the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is the artery: stop then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising high like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: hasten then, and put your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens; bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be cautious, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched, and it beats against you, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Et pren une escorce de fistice, and the rent, and take one of the halves and tie it well just to the other day; if the wound stays clean, that's good; if not, so treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stopping is not grievous in more dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm strap.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle is so helped that it stops bleeding from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if it points too deep and finds the nerve, and it swells and the hemorrhage is grievous, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then you must loosen the suture of the instrument with all your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is vein between the two nerves, then cut it along the length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The wound of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to cleanse it by bleeding at the olive or myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, since there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the most gentle position, and not distress anything if one must do it the first time, and then start again; and in some cases, the joints of certain men may be so swollen that one must do it the first time, but nothing will be distressed.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only necessary to preserve health and to prevent diseases from coming; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are open: that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of autumn, and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one should bleed on the first day or the third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sick who are administered to for diseases have no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever need arises by day or by night, at all hours and in all times; and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant with more than three months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one bleed those who are over 60 years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to heal, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels with a light purge if he has retained many fevers, so that the veins do not attract superfluous things from the intestines that can harm the main members; nor does one heal who is too greasy from meat, or drunk, until they are better; and those who have had a colicky passion, vomiting, defecation of the belly, and frequent habituation to women, travail, watching, and fasting, and all such virtues, either by means of arms or body; then subtilize the humors if the body is gross, through foods, drinks, and medicines, as long as you have the power; then go into a bath, unless something prevents it, in order to subtilize the blood, and heal the belly around the third hour, just as we have said; and take care that day not to work, nor strain oneself, nor indulge in luxury, or similar things; and be joyful and happy, and let the healer be higher than one being healed, and gently stroke his arm two or three times, then loosen the band above moderately, because if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow properly; and then wipe the place with his hand, until the veins swell up and can be felt; then moisten the healer's palm with a small amount of old oil, then place his left hand on top of that belly, a small area where one wants to heal, so that the belly does not become inflamed or damaged by the bleeding.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, and si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, and ne puet ovrir li voinne, and ensi est on de ceus; and s'il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein overflows the first time, that is good; but if not, then one recommences slightly below or above the same place in haste, unless the swelling has gone away.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the swelling is swollen, and the patient fears, then let it be left for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: by chance there may come abscesses quickly; nor enter into a bath, until re-starting the treatment if it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you see, then trust in that very wound itself to all the flame directly; and work hastily for a moment, so that the swelling is swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swelling, do not begin to lance again, and put a small amount of oil on top, for it lightens the body's blood and is good in this swelling that the oil lies; and thus administer the oil in each lancing that you close the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing does triple and four-armed apertures, when one puts it on the swelling; so finely the flesh and parts when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a big abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not lanced for that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put a moist sponge on the swelling in water and wine, a little warm, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it remains at the swelling after some days with no blackness or verdure, then it does not harm; and if you see, put something of aloes or myrrh mixed with calanticum, musk, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So be careful that you do not put on any of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut; but make a dry poultice to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quality and quantity, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become more subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is weak and without help, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and have the flaps wide; and for the one who is feeble, do the opposite, and nurse him quietly often, and must be nursed by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of nursing saves from hemorrhage of blood and numbness of nerve, and is worth more than the nursing of the long or the large.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body is failing due to bloodletting, it is necessary to give moist bread in a juice of green apples; if he is overheated, then treat with blood three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, then moisten his bread beforehand in a sweet syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-odored syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he pukes blood from the wound, after a great deal of bleeding, it is necessary that he drinks broth of flesh, and sweet-smelling syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to break his arm and heal again, it is necessary that, when he is weakened by great bleeding, he heals slowly and gradually, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to break his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, then he heals in 72 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal from another part, then he must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to drain a great quantity, and enlarge the wound until it reaches the pectoral muscle; then you should reward all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on his pulse while he is healing, so that death may not come in place of pectoral muscle, and this happens many times when the surgeons are neglectful; and it does not need to happen when you see the arm needs to be untied, and blood issues a second time, and the wound is closed, you should press strongly; unless it is curved, then extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad; but let it heal a second time; or point to the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood that has congealed at the wound's edge melts away, and place on top of it a poultice remoistened in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let him bleed in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is healed at the place of the wound because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	Et the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water, until the pus is red; then bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, and now heal through the middle, not from the wide or long; and make the wounds large, and heal very close to the joint of the hand, and if nothing can be extracted, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it would put more harm than good; and this healing is safer from all other veins, since there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the swelling on the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver; and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, if you see it; and if it heals through, and if you take care of everything completely, then nothing will grieve; and do not go too deeply beneath the surface, for the nerves are below all denuded of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let out as much blood as is necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein to stop it quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The pulse on the left hand is indicative of the disease of mouse, and do everything just as I told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the sophene is worth to all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of fluids, and disease of the reins, and of the old knees and legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his sickness are that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rains; then she gives health or a larger rain, or to the ankle, which is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you take the pulse above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and take the pulse across also as in cutting; and let the flame be anointed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the physician fails the first time, she then begins again the second time above a little bit, for the leg is salty; nor should you doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same for the sophene of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The wound of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its pulse indicates the pain of the loins when it's hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, and estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n'apert li voinne; and if it apert, then le saine en toutes les manieres that you can, and in crossing; and it is better that you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is much recovered by many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then saine any part of it that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and do so much cutting of the flesh as you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wounds from a suction cup
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cups are made of horns, or lead, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction which is without wounding is according to two manners: or it is with fire, or without fire; and suction which is made by wounding and extracting blood is made on 14 parts of the body, from which some are at the head; and others in the neck; and two in each side of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction above the hips; and the suction in both arms; and the suction in both legs; and the suction in both ankles; and the suction does not treat with blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore one should not weaken it too much, as is done in bleeding a vein; and it is not necessary to administer it, whether by fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to purge due to illnesses or habits, let us administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time; for there are those who, when they need to purge, have a heavy head; and such ones who find repletion and reddening on their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and such ones who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and flowing blood; and those who dream, and see by night's blood and hurt and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we order them to cup after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The juice of the myrtle tree so helps in relieving the headache that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body's waste; and this purging is instead of the cephalic juice, and it is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, for this does great harm to them; and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and because of this it's necessary to put the cup a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The hiccough in the neck is in place of the sinew of the chief and of the basilica, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the belly, and for rending of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion; and one must put a poultice on it, for if it holds too tightly, so it will occasion obstruction or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The hiccoughs are between the two ridges of the neck so they are worth for the pains of the chief, and obtalmia and emigrainne, and for constriction, and for the pain as far as the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the sinew of the basilica; and one must command the patient to stretch out his hand while sitting, so he does not compress the artery, and does not bring forth streams of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The cupping below the chin is worth for mouth diseases, and for corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it's in place of the pulses of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The scapular effusions are worth a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The hiccoughs of the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, for it causes blood to flow from these thick veins; and command the patient not to strike too deeply with his fist, for the place is bare of flesh, and lies under nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The poultice that is on the backside is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and similar diseases below, and it must be large, and made of earth, so that it can well draw out; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break through; and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The poultices of the legs are manifestly healing, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are worth as much as the old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and restore the flowers; and they are placed above the two Sophene bones, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring about faintness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the poultice is to put it on first empty, and then suck in a temperate way, and apply it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then stop, and put on new poultices, and take heed of the disposition of the body, for there are some who have thin skin, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike once only, and necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out a little bit of blood at a time, we can only stand one blow.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	Et if we want a lot of blood, so we repeat often; and if the blood is thick, then fire it up deeply, and the ends should be pierced suddenly, and it behooves to him who has tough skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the areas of the leeches with oil appetizing and dissolving: if this is in summer, with oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seed; and if this is in winter, with oil of cress, or of lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being bled has tender skin and large pores, it does not behoove to put oil there, but rather it behooves to wash afterwards with water of rose, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of pumpkin, or water of porcelain-like stone, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive swellings drink wine old, or water of soursop, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and do not bother to clean with a poultice before the bath nor after the bath, but rather one hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep afterwards, and it is necessary for him to be careful when he should be lanced and when he is lanced.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are healing are choleric, and their wound is too inflamed and swollen; so it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as green apples, endives, lettuce at ease, and similar things; and few dishes, and mutton's flesh, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, so take honey syrup and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and few dishes, and few small birds and young hens; and the day he will be lanced, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men some time triacle or muscat before or after the lancing, in order to comfort the principal members; and the wound should be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Les ventouses que sont mises sans ferir sont celles qui sont mises sur le foie, et sur la rate, et podagre, et sur le ventre et la bouche et les reins et la hanche, car ce membre ne souffrent mie ferir sous oultre, et ne le fait on que pour attirer sang de membre en membre, si comme nous mettons sur les mamelles lorsque le néant saine; pour oster la viscosité qui est au membre, si comme nous mettons ventouses sur le ventre et sur la bouche pour amenuiser le membre; et oster la douleur quant il y a opilation ou pierre, si oster par sa vertu attractive par hasard l'opilation, ou déserter la pierre de son lieu; et ainsi fait-elle lorsque on la met sur le foie et sur la rate lorsque il y a viscosité retenue, et ces ventouses sont administrées vides pour sucer tant simplement; et certaines fois sont administrées ensemble feu, et certaines fois pleines d'eau tiède, si comme en maladies du pleurésin, et de telle manière on emplit la ventouse d'eau chaude seule, ou d'eau où il a cuit des herbes convenables à cela.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont,
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: take the wax candle or the linen and put it in the cupping glass across the rod that is in the cupping glass, so that the light will be at the bottom of the cupping glass, lest it burn the patient; and then put it on the member, and make sure it's on the pustule we mentioned earlier, so when you're ready to release, the vapor will go out, and remove the cupping glass; and take up the linen as before, and start again if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass then which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, it has no rod nor pustule, and it is only used when it is full of water, and it is put on the member alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cups are only used when there is no place to put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in areas without flesh, such as toes or nails, and others like them; and the user's skill is that when you find cups that are in sweet water, free from irritation, you take them; and you put one in sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be drained of blood and cupping glass, then wipe the member until it is red, and put on the cups; and when they are full and bursting, if it's a place where you can put a cup, then put it there, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the bandage from dry, and then from water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the swelling occurs too late after the wound, then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the swelling subsides; and if there is much swelling, then put on vitriol crushed or gallstones, and similar things, until it subsides; or you put half a handful of peeled fava beans on the swelling, and leave them until they dry out at the swelling, so it will stop now; and if you need more, take other wound dressings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the dressings don't take hold, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until the swelling goes away, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry; and when you see that they are dripping, then sprinkle on a little bit of alum and crushed silk, or ashes, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The book of fractures begins here;
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a treatment for fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Here is the translation:
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we say the prologue to this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, if it is necessary you should hasten to treat the patient on one side and the other, unless some thing is wrong with them, such as weakness of body, or children, or old men; or if the time is not very cold, or too warm; and moist humors, that is to say cold joints, and flesh of hare and rabbit, and do not drink wine, nor use greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of aposteme hot, or spreading of matter in the member; then revive the patient with his former government as he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meat that makes great nourishment, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and ris, and testicles, and feet, and belly of whale, and eel, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment the patient is restored more quickly and sooner than the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old men and decrepit people cannot be well set or joined according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone with large tendons that bind and join the member together, until it is as strong as before; and do not neglect his work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish him with rich meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is another than the fracture of the chest or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that occurs when an arm is broken, and another in bending, such as the breaking of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And also a fracture with wound, and a fracture with a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And at every manner have its own device, and its own proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into its place; and it is known the breaking of the bone by that which the joint is twisted, and appears well by departure, and sounds on pressing with the hand; and when there is no twisting nor son at the toucher, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no point of breaking; but it may well have twisting, or crack, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So do not move it by hand, but put on medications that come later, and then bind it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breaking that comes in a circle, and are the two parts of joints, it is necessary to put them now at a point equally, so that apostemes do not come there; and if apostemes hot come there, then leave alone for a day, until the apostemes are appeased; then set it equal as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of one is more light than restorations of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it needs to be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	Et if in the bone there are broken pieces, then stretch it by two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and your hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then reduce by all means the swelling in their places as much as you can, and take care that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring about hot abscess and contraction in the member through their work, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is stable, then chastise well the patient so that they do not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a disposition that it feels no pain; and take care that it be set straightly, so that any twisting does not occur when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, put a hot poultice on the abscess and that which takes away the swelling, and let it be like that for some days; then strain on these stars, and be of one-third of a wide cane or reed, or of fir wood from which we make clefts, or of palm branches, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the star you put on the break is a little bigger and wider than the others; and be as long as it needs to be for the member of small or great size; then strain on the stars just like you did at the first joint, then tie above with a thread smoothly, just like at the first joint on the break; tighter above, then less; and it is necessary that the thread be even, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bondings with linen ropes twisted wrong, and that's a great error, because the bonding cannot be equal if it is too fine, and does not need to be between each star less than two finger widths.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is hurt by the joints of the splints after the straining in their healthy places, then put below them bandages of linen or flaxen cloth, so that he does not get injured.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the break and the sinew is torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to strain splints on all the broken members at first.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Car when the limbs are great, it is not necessary to put them in casts sooner than after 4 days or 7 days, or more according to your security of abscess happening subsequently; and see here the manner of ancient poultices for restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which remains on the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this composition not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common manner of the poultice restoring breakage to several conditions, and especially in women and little children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of poultice restoring the break and dislocation and torsion: take 20 parts of absinthe and ladani and enule and asefetide and gum arabic and myrrh, 5 parts; aloes, 8 parts; and grind them into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of poultice that is good for twisting: take mugwort and vervain, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 9 parts; cinnamon, 6 parts; Armenian balm, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to plaster joints and separated bones back into their places, and to soothe the pain that happens, and to shape the bone, and to break: take new linen, and soak it in water and oil cooked, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not heal at all, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of wormwood, camomile, violet flowers, and vetch flour, each one in equal parts; and grind, and mix with wine, and apply to the member if it is inflamed, or mix with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster more strongly than the first one, when an abscess is long in coming to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and seed of flax, calamus, melilot, and savory, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each in equal part; and grind, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hipocrates writes in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken member before restoring it except for a compound made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should apply dry things slightly warm to a broken member in order to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make a plaster that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird feathers and wormseed, and equal parts of all, grind it, and make a plaster and the like.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then take it off a little later, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, or the bone has not returned to its place; if not, do not take it off for several days. If pain comes to the area, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, then hasten, remove it, and take away the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge from the sea, moistened in water, and immerse the area so that the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, dampened in water or rose oil, and bind with a bandage until you are sure of hot aposteme; and rest the inflammation of the member, and the pain will be gone, then resume subtle treatment, and a little plaster, and do not strain it as hard as before; and treat subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has fully broken open and is red and painful with swelling, and you need to apply plaster and binding again, then do so again, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Et s'il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s'aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j'ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n'est, saiches que norrissemens n'i puet venir; arose lou donques d'aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c'est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n'i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l'ovrer droitement.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many manners of breakages are, and diverse figures, and the causes are determined; for there are breakages that are made by percussion of sword, and the collarbone is broken so that it loses all its bone down to the suture which is below the bone, as happens in a hack or a fist; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a packed blow, or a split, or a collarbone break, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent breakage that approaches just below the fascia which is under the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is reunited in the bone as finely as a mouse, and it's a small crack, and therefore this breakage is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made or by piercing with an arrow, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the piece of bone fall down, and it looks like the way blacksmiths file on bellows; then the arrow goes in.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or whose head is moist bone, like that of an infant; and it happens to all these manners of breakage where small pieces are detached as they are; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breakings through the subtraction above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs gently on top, then opens up the black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, and the flesh issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in more or less disposition, then he cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, if you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the skin under the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents that we have said will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone break comes to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part thus: and it is that you take hold of the patient's chief, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and on the wound's shape, as soft as you can, and if bleeding decoration comes to reveal the bone, or an abscess arises, then apply what is needed, and it is that you fill the area with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is pacified, and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut off at the narrow cutting before, and that's the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another instrument larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various instruments with different shapes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron, and work lightly so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer instruments with handles, not too deep or they will go through the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, each one fitting its own place in the shape of the bone, so that you can have handles for all skulls; and this is the form of the three ways of handles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a handle on the bone, and turn it to your right until you know the bone has been pierced; then place the handle elsewhere a little bit later, and do this all around, then scrape out the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertuis, and make it as fine as possible, lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as forceps, pincers; and beware not to touch the brain or the sacral membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the residue that remains on the bone to all other instruments resembling a scalpel, but it must be more sharp and subtle than the other scalpels; and if there is nothing of small bones or scales left, gently extract them with the instruments; then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more sound; and he lifts it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break is most open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, which has the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And don't cut away from one side, and the part is torn in two directions, so that the cutter is directed towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly score all around the bone, and take good care of the membrane that is below; if it's attached to the bone, then just scrape it slightly, because it's not harmed at all, nor is there fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach to the membrane, and the bone is scraped so only on top, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, in order to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	And take before great scrapers, and after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine and subtle breakages, it is necessary that you administer according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily understood by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the abscess is open, then it's necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth double-folded in two or three places, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you don't harm the abscess, then administer above the other layer, and don't strain it too much until it keeps the wound simply; and let it stay like this for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then release it, and administer medicines such as roots of plants, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer afterwards medicines without biting; and watch that the wound is clean in the end, so you don't leave an ointment, nor allow the bowels to assemble under the skull, for when the bowels gather on top of the brain membrane, they will run and burst, and the patient will suffer great harm; because when something bitter is placed on top of the abscess, it will necrotize above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no fever comes except by the medicine that has been applied, for it to have such virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them together in a cloth; then apply it to the wound; then perform the treatment in the manner of treatments that is necessary, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only swells or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must take your small needle or awl and put the break inside it, and insert it into the nail, and press gently, until the nail regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach to the place, it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a rod, a little big.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do it again in the same way, and strive to restore it on the first day, if you can; or if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then insert a linen thread into the head of the nail, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you thrust one thing against another, if there is a break; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the night.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some physicians say that one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with the mixture of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes it is necessary to put owl's down feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft wrapping around, and the break is held tight, and blows on the patient; or make what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes forth while you are working on it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in rose oil, or in one pint of aquilion.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, then apply an poultice by defecation, with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then put it on gentle warm compresses, and do not bind too tightly; and if the break of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then draw out the fragments to suitable instruments, then sew the wound, and cure the things that are charred, and unifying, as poultices and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no internal wound in the bone, then treat the tent, and put in plugs of cloth, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken below, and there is no wound to be found, and the break is only so far, and is not split in two, except for the cartilages inside, then one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jaw, that you put your two index fingers in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left side of the jaw, then put your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break inside lightly, and set it to the other hand by default, and make equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a poultice, and put on one double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a great iron band well made, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back to point what has changed; and put a poultice on, of mill powder with egg yolk or barley flour, after you have removed the previous poultice; and put on the poultice a light linen cloth, and if the poultices are dry, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes forth, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, reward no part of the bone that has been removed; but gently remove with suitable instruments for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on one of those poultices suitable for this, to promote flesh, until he is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks many times before, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two, with fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom holds the assistant that feels the broken forceps; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then set the break to your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor imperfection.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; then stretch and lift the forceps, and strain the sphere to your hand, so that you set the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps out backwards because it comes too far in, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and puts a mean bolster under his shoulder; and has the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forceps is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the break to your fingers, and if you find it debris-filled, it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any impediment, then cut it with one of the incisors you have; but put this instrument under the forceps to guard the syphilis.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it appears like a spoon, and is not shaved, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one large and the other thick, just like the healing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain of a hot abscess, then count the wound, and if the routing is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then employ the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes forth, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put powder made from mill dust and egg albumen on the bone, and then put light bandages on top, and place a small spear under the strap, if needed. Then take a very large cloth strip one palm wide, and place a double wrapping of cloth on top of the bandages, and the powder; then take a thin rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that cloth strip so that the head of the cloth strip is hanging down; and place the rod on the splint, and turn the cloth strip over the shoulder blade, under the healthy part and under the diseased part. Then rewrap each part, and when you see that the splint holds the broken bone in a good position, and you clearly see that the rod does not move above the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the strap to lift the aid in high; so that the break of the forceful blow by the alignment of the shoulder blade will be alleviated, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not untie it unless there are malicious accidents, for up to 20 days; then reapply the powder if you see that it is needed, and restrain it and leave it like this until it is restored; and it is restored in the most within 28 days, and less than some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder breakage
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Poc avient que li espaule brise or large leu ne em mileu, and ne lou seit on fuers that par lou touchement; si l'apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, and la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, in toutes les manieres that tu peux; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin with abun d'uef, and estoupes legieres, and met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus one estele large and subtil, un poc plus large of l'espaule, and se desoz l'estele est chevemens in any leu of l'espaule, si emple that cheveure of estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; and puis l'estraint a tout one grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve of son leu, and regarde le lien chescun jor; and toutes les fois that il amolist, si l'estraint, and met igal the estele s'elle est fuer of son leu, and gise li malaides sus son costeit; and li espaule est restouree in XX jors or in xxv. And when cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, and soies seur, car ce n'est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone appears ahead and points below the joint, then go up and cut it, and make what we have said about relieving an abscess to cool.
de la brisure dou pis	of the rib breakage
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks later.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in mid-air, if it falls down below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks assistance, and altogether, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the wounds on the broken bone, and it seems to be quite bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient sits on their back, and puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the edges of the two sides with your hands, and makes it even in all ways you can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put on poultices and bandages over the subtle needle of salt or another light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the ligament back around to the back, and bind it tightly, and reward each hour with oil, and if it relaxes, then bind again; and if it needs to be untied because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, and remove the poultice, and address what has come there in ways of cures; then rewind the poultice, and bind until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib breakage
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur except in large places after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are slippery; and it seems well to inquiry from above.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedy is that you set the break even as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put a poultice and bind with an iron band if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, just like a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and breathes with difficulty, and everything and vomits a great amount of bloody discharge, and this is a grievous illness, and the ancients have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push the breakage to the end.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless abscesses hot and inflamed come, if it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one should put cupping glasses on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems like a reason; however, there is doubt whether the cupping glass will attract the superfluities to the joint because of the weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the joint with a moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the ligament around, then be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone which is pointed at the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the location of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put something below the instrument to guard against the pus; and then one must saw the bone and draw it out slightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come forth, then place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on them and wrap them around the affected area; and cure while taking care of that which pertains to the abscess, being mindful of the cost or expense there is until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the collarbone breakage
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Occasionally comes a breakage of the collarbone, and rarely bends; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them out; and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that there are many mortal conditions, and if he moves and feels well when one strains and pricks them, know that the joints of the bone are sound, and that the patient is cured, if one puts a cure in place.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident lies in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and egestion without desire; and when one has stretched him across his belly, there is egestion without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is bent over his back and wants to straighten up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor much in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you rub him if there is a warm abscess, and put oil of rosery or egg yolk on it until it is appeased; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep at all on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover with a splint; and take the bone away, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if they are large, by stitching, then treat with ointment anointing flesh, until he is healed; and if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow", place your pouch on your left hand and hold it equal to your right hand at your power, then apply a plaster and an iron bandage if necessary; then bind it tight, and if there are loose bones, do so again, and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the hipbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the hipbone is broken, and if it does happen, then there follows a little diminishment at the head; and make it long, and decline to the nape of the neck, and comes to the patient with pain at the joint, and puncture, and swells up what has been broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then place equal to that breakage, until it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is from the length, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, then put on a plaster, and then put on a wooden or horn bandage, and bind the breakage so that it does not move; and apply the joint below the ribs, until the bones are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if warm abscesses come, do not touch them, until the warm abscess is appeased, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as it needs to be bound, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the breast and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of straight wood with a middle groove, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind with two joints, and bend them upwards, and make the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the position, and has about half a wooden curve, then bend down onto some heavy thing or have the minister stretch it downwards; then place the mirror so that the breakage is equal in his hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hatreil, and bind his hand to his neck, then instruct two ministers to have one hold what is on the breakage in their hands, and the other extend each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the strap under the padding and on top of the padding, and extend each of the attendants to their portion.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the padding is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you place the strap in the middle under the armpit, and the other one towards the outer side, under the padding; and also if the padding is towards the outer side, then it is necessary to put the strap lightly, without effort, until the padding is even on top and on the outer side; then bind the padding securely, as is necessary, and hold it tight, so that no abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it until seven days, and put on a moist linen cloth in oil of rose, until the warm abscess is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then bring together the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the bandage, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a state of rest, unless some thing hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use iron bands, and put on the breakage a larger and stronger band than the others, with two spaces between each band, and have each band so large that it passes over the breakage three fingers from each side; then bind on the bands, thus as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Et if you see the position of stars and the straining, as we have said, in the work that you set back the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then let it be left to join until the seventh day, as we have said; then look each three days at the swelling, lest purulence or inflammation comes to the place, or the cicatrization cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it addresses, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident comes to it, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion of equal wool, and look every hour during the day or at night that the shape of the broken member does not change, or the bond is not loosened; if it addresses through the virtue of medicine, and give him food as we have written before, in such a way that the food be for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 40 days from then; and afterwards one must unbind and administer bath and ointments to direct the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, so it will take 7 days or 2 months to unbind.
de la brisure du bras	I think I have been reading an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise on the treatment of a broken arm (la brisure du bras). The text is written in Old French, and it describes various methods for setting and binding a broken arm, as well as providing instructions for post-operative care.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fasciculus", from which one is small, and it supports the pouch; and the other is great, and it lies below, towards the little toe. By chance, the great fasciculus breaks alone, or the small, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's just the small bones that are broken, then one must extend it slightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bones that are broken, then one must pull more strongly; and extend above one cushion, and lift the little pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, so that the patient is crossed over himself, with one cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the assistants' arms to the part below his hand, or to the ligament, and another assistant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then place each in its place, and if there are any that are loosened or protrude, and you cannot restore them to their place, then fashion them with a saw and an osteum, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it has an open wound from the breaking, I spoke of it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there appear abscesses warm, then take a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and apply the poultice gently above, until the warm abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the poultice, and put on the plaster made of mill powder with a lot of egg white, afterwards place the bandages, and let the bandage at the break be stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have 6 bandages or arms in more than one disposition: whether the break is in one bone or two; and strain more above the break than elsewhere, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths on top of the break be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the string that holds it be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water until those itchings are soothed; and let the member not immediately rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the stretching again, and if the ligament is loosened and the bones are separated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little and let it be thus for some days, until the swelling comes to it, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, then leave them loose for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or around that, then tie the hands to his neck, and have his necks equal, and beware of movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this dislocation is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	(Note: This appears to be a title or header, rather than a sentence to translate. The text is likely referring to "De la brisure de la main", which translates to "About the Breaking of the Hand")
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are not many breakages, but only slight ones.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crosswise and sit upright in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister's fingers to the broken bones, and make them equal with the mirror, until they are well joined; and apply a poultice and bandages if boils do not arise, then put in a candle according to the quantity of the wound; and let it be wrapped in one cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is at the parting around the belly of the palm, then make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken palm; and then bind it with one long cloth, and let the candle be as high as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is at the outside, then it is necessary that you put a candle on top and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the strap between the toes.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage comes to one of our toes, such as the little toe, then make it equal, as necessary; and bind it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight candle to lift the breakage, and does not move; and if the breakage is at another toe, such as in the index or one of the others, then make it equal, and tie it with the healthy toe that follows; or you tie them all together in one holding, whichever is better, or you put a candle on top, like the little toe; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot boil, and support what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	(Note: This appears to be a title or header, rather than a sentence to translate. The text is likely referring to "De la cuixe brisie", which translates to "About the Broken Toe")
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the toe is many times broken, and well one sees when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that you tie one strap above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their strap to their equal part; and this is when the breakage is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the nail, so that one of the strings is towards the fingernail, and the other strings are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and then be the strings below the knee, and be the extension downward; then put the saw on the bone in both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, lest abscesses come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is hot boil, then let it subside and then return to your work and care; the treatment is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap above the break with a bandage doubled in two or three, and leave off excesses, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the knee and the leg, below the knee on the inside, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the knee the bandage, then put above the break stays, and put one stay above the bone of the leg; then employ the lead wire between the leg and the knee with soft drapery to put equal constraint, then begin to bind strongly three turns or four on the break; and when you go up further on the break, and less tighten; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the knee, and tie three stays above, then return down below to the head of the thread, as far as you come to the foot; and the constraint, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there are pieces of bone that cause pain, then it is necessary to smooth them out if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to split the area open and pull forward; and the wound should be treated as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the box is broken like this, so that one puts stones in it, as in the aid and in the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration thus made, the patient does not remain sound.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the box is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the various complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that there is little breakage, but it folds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or a pit, and it happens to all wounds, whether they are large or small, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one places equal parts on both sides of his knees, as long as it can be assembled; then put the ointment and place a round stone there, if you need to, and hold it as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements we have said in other breakings, such as abscesses, hot and similar things; and apply to each accident what is needed, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that the leg has two bones, of which one is called by the right name "tibia", and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens with all fractures as it does in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is all done. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely out of shape.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it then bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it bends downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be shorter and lighter; and apply according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, then take two pieces of beech wood that border the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap in two places one bandage above and another below, and tie it in the middle just so, and at this point the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus is well; and some administer a splint of beech wood along the length of the leg, and it is of beech, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is done in the breaking where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; then treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the toes a little, and there is only slight damage in one or more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones rising one above the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; and then place your foot now on his seat, where the bones are lifted up, then press it so that they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages above, and below the belly of the foot a small piece of cloth at two full hands, then bind it to the ankle properly, then wrap drapes around and other things you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some broken toes, then restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on each broken toe a stone according to the length of the toe, and make it slightly larger, then put beneath the foot that cloth I mentioned earlier, and bind it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, then place a stone on top of each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tie the cloth beneath the foot; and let it be so that the stone is above the chief of the cloth, outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakings, as we have said; and apply to each accident just as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the breaking of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of man is broken, or of woman, restore it in this way as we have said about the bones of the hare; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there and intends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies to many positions the right way of restoration: heed it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it in the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or so: and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has breaking with wound, whether it be great like the bone of the box or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds we have said bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply vinegar to it, if you have nothing else; and then begin again to restore the breakage at the same hour or on the next day, unless gangrene comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess is calm, then leave its restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscess may be appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the skin uncovered, then it is necessary that you set it slightly to your hands in small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for setting equal to your hands, then reset it with this instrument of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take 3 or 4, according to his need in each treatment of breaking; and be strong and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be curved forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", therefore it is necessary that the curved key be placed on top of the apparent bone; and bind it once, until it recovers, and make them equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the top of the bone, until the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we said, then file it down with a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or gouge, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone from roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So be in his place, then moisten the drapeil with black stiptic wine, and properly set it there; and do not put on the wound cerote or any other thing that has oil, so as to bring forth corruption and rot; then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish practitioners, and they have brought forth on the patient death or decay or corruption sometimes; and it is better to be gentle and soft in other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is foul or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come to pass, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it does not need to be put on ointments; but envelop around, in place of ointments, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the bow shape form on the wound, then remove what you put on top all wine, and apply an ointment good for wounds, just as tetrafarmac and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you bind the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is bound up and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the boil runs down smoothly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead returns to boil, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you carefully clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these unnecessary fragments that bring back that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to pass, or another manner of corruption, then it is fitting that you cure it, according to what is written in its chapter before this.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bone, and similar ones of the great limbs, then do not pull it out at all, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it can be removed; by chance it may fall after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see many times after the healing of the breakage, even when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care if you have fresh ones: administer stiptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaica, and similar others, in the same way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with black vinegar or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and tighten it well, and do not release it for many days; then release it, and start another one, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it on a piece of well-made linen; for the properties of linen are that they remove all swelling from members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then file it down, and make the excess apparent; or you give it to any scraper until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone breakage is restored and remains after the member weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is that it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come to the nourishment of the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too great movements, nor in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and comfort; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws towards great nourishment, and often washes with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs to the member; and revives it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death ensues; however, if the swellings and torture are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as vervain leaves, roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and take the mucilage of vervain, and mix it with hen fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on it; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodation is removed because of continuous and prolonged friction against moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement in each member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the curvature is hardened and indurated, like stone, and needs to be cut away with iron, then it must be covered just up to the bone, incised slightly by a subtle instrument; and attention and study should be placed in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it must be immediately brought back into place without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance if it is reset with points at the swollen place; therefore it is not fitting to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it brings forth pus and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient healthy again, then leave him, until the abscess has been appeased; then arise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations to the end of this book.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are a little pulled out of their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through a few gentle movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you should reset it quickly, without delay; and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and puts the mirror's spout into one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and with the other two hands be free to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax, his jawbones, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror sets it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if setting it back is difficult, especially if the two jaws are together, then rise them with warm water and oil, until they can be moved slightly; nor delay in setting it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Et when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well with gentle soothing, then put moist cloths on top of a poultice made from rose oil and wax; and bind it lightly with soft threads; and the patient sleeps on their back, and their jaws are being held between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor do they strain themselves to chew, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are numb; and then eat what he wants lightly, and does not bother himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the mandible is well numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their point within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and accustomed sweating come, and by chance, belly trouble, and by chance, vomiting of pure gall.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a judgment; and many times the person who has it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side towards the back of the body and the chest, and is dislocated sometimes to the front, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on a poultice and bandage, and bind it; and the joint that is near the cut cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it does dislocate at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on a poultice and bandage, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the joint of the shoulder is brought back when it has become dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways: because it slips to the side of the neck below; or to the part of the back; and by chance, it slips above, and this happens rarely; nor does it slip backward for the shoulder, nor does it slip inward for the nerves; and many times it slips downward toward the neck, especially in those with little flesh, for it jumps forth hastily; in those with enough flesh, it jumps forward at paces and returns at paces.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they are percussed or crushed, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore behooves you to examine it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when they fall downward toward the neck, and make a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them manifest diversity; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and below the neck where the top of the shoulder touches, just like an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nape, nor move in any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you can see it manifestly when touching; and this kind of dislocation is not to be cured, unless it is new, or the child is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the assistants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their poultices below the arm bone, and lift the jointure to its place by force above; and the assistants lift the hand, and stretch it up high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	Et si elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can hold with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can also do it in another way: thus take a long iron rod and put it on the ground, so that the head of the joint is as deep as the piston, and not too big or too small; then place it under the patient, but only if he has draped himself softly above, and the patient's hand be stretched down below from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, do this treatment: take an iron rod with a head of three palms in length and four palms in width, which has the head bent so that it can easily enter into the hollow under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then wrap it with soft cloth on top of the wooden head, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the arm of the patient; and extend your arm over the rod's length, and tie the assistant's hand to the rod, and the arm at the shoulder of the hand, then put the arm on one side of an eschillon from a large sieve, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, however it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit an equal woolen sphere, then place the ointment around the armpit with powder from the mill, with incense and hen's egg yolk, on all of the shoulder and around, then hold it under the armpit in a way, and turn the bandage around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he mends little by little, until the members are comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then mend more after five days or seven, and move him; and if it is firm and has not become softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in, or for another reason, then you must administer cauterization on three parts, as it is described before this chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after seven days it does not hold, and the joint is not held, nor can he lift his arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast, or the shoulders, or behind, is made by thrusting and stretching with hands, and another treatment is administered; and heal until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the member and tardiness of movement, then the patient should take many baths until that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in points, and returns to those points; and if it is dislocated from all sides, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because one sees well and feels well; and reset according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient's skin with the wound, so you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joints are swollen, and cannot flex the arm, nor touch their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess does not come to life, for if the abscess comes to life, then it would be grievous to reposition; and by chance it cannot be completely repositioned from all sides, especially when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and brings more pain, and by chance there comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is this: when it is such that one can reset it, you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and bring the joint to its roots together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and brings the joint to the root of the palm that is out of place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong stretching; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it two ministers, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then wrap a double cloth long and wide around; and when the doctor has joined the jointure to their hand, apply some oil to soften the jointure, then bind the jointure firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some egg white on it, and strain it firmly, and tie the arm at the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the ointment and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	Et if he feels greyness after the setting of the joint, and it moves, so bathe him and rub him gently, and press as much as he is assuaged; or you put some fat sheep's wool on the jointure, then leave it for a day and a night, then take it off, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the jointure temperately, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see fit, so put some moist heated flaxseed with butter on it, and strain it on; so he will return to his condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is undone, and the swelling is slight, more than in other joints Nevertheless, it ought to be brought back into place quickly, in the same moment as it is dislocated, so that the swelling does not increase or an abscess forms hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the setting is when you put the patient's hand on a board, and extend the fingers of the good hand, and the surgeon's hand places it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and presses until it recovers; however, it is necessary for you to look if it is well in place; then put the patient's other hand on a board at extension and setting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back on their hand on the table, and the doctor puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If she returns now, it's well. If not, then the pressure of soothing poultices on abscesses will calm down, and let it be so that it does not start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put her back in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted; and nothing bad can happen to the patient as long as the hand is numb, and she cannot strain anything at all: thus know that the nerves are strained, or the arteries; so there is no other remedy except to stretch by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps it's not worth anything.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is back in place, put on the emplastrum that we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is any stiffness, then bathe it in hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	The dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The tendons of the hand are dislocated at each end, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly; then the tendons stay and support the dislocation until it returns, then hold the head of the tendon and bend it towards the part where it is separated; and leave it for two days, and then put it even that day; and tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and untie it from day to day, and make it move, and tie it again to the nut; and do this often until it is straight, and do the same when it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do it just like you did before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the hip of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hip of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the ancient methods of cures tell it through great words, wherein there is not much benefit in all; but I have abridged it according to my intention and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the belly before, there is no intelligence or health; and similarly that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot heal the fever except that which comes properly to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face evenly, and have a strain below him, so he does not get hurt; then place one brick at the head on the ground firmly, and another by the feet, and tie a bandage around the joints of the patient, and one around the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the bandages, one for the head and the other for the feet, between the two bricks; and they should be well closed, the brick as we have said, and the physician put his palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, so take a board of three arm-lengths long, and hollow it out below the appearance, and the patient be on the side, and push the head of the board under the appearance; then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mirrors at his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see, do so with the twisted one that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And so take two brands at the head of the patient's arm, and on the feet two others, with between each brand, above and below, a palm's length long; and in each brand one perforation, where the twisted one runs, and be the brands firmly in the earth, so they do not move; and between each pair of brands be one turning brand, as the twisted ones turn, and in two turns have two small brands, one palm-length long, to turn the twisted one; then tie the string that is among the straps on the twisted one towards the head, and the other string towards the feet at the other twisted one, and each of the attendants turn their twisted one to all the string, and the master put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come apart except for dislocations alone, nor does it happen like with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, and before and behind; and more so inside than outside, and less so before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	Et the knowledge of his dislocation is this: that when one joins the diseased leg with a healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot double their knee on fire; and it is the joint which is located below the swelling of an abscess hot, because the head of the cleft comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one to whom it happens in front is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well shaped according to its completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the crotch is at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are that you should wait if the dislocation is old and it remains according to its condition, so there is no need for care; and it does not behoove him to have presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of three manners of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there will be no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you appear with the minister strong, and place the leg strongly on his hands, or at the bond that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand thus, as he places his hands beneath his armpits, then tightens a soft bandage above the cleft; and another takes hold of the head of the bandage; and they all stretch upward and downward at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Se ceu non, if not
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Et si tu ne la peux serrer en ceste maniere que nous avons dit, si convient que tu lies les deux pieds du malade ensemble d'un fort lien souef sur les deux talons, et sur les deux genoux, et soit le jambe malade étendue deux doigts plus que les autres; puis soit pendu sur le chef d'un fusil, et soit en sus de terre deux bras de long; puis commande à un ministre qu'il embrase le chef de la cuisse, et soit un autre ministre pendant avec le malade, qui embrasse fortement la cuisse, car les jointures reviennent maintenant hâtivement.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are in the back, so lies the patient, as we have said in those with gilbositeit, and stretch the strap over the affected leg properly, and on the hip also; then put two brands, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one brand between the patient's thighs in the form; and have planted moist sponges around, so that it does not hurt the patient, then each minister stretches out towards him, and the mirror puts equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	But not, put on the table and press thus as we have said in Gilboisite, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the afflicted leg quickly and according to what I have said; and place the physician's hand on top of the painful ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, then it's not necessary to stretch the patient downwards or lift them up onto the earth, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated in the back, as we have said about lying on two hips; and let them lie on their belly, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be ready when the patient stretches out their legs, and they are even; then insert the cups, and apply the plaster, and restrain with a binding, so that the hip does not move; and let them rest for three days or four, then release it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then restrain as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and let it go smoothly, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, and s'ele ne s'aert a sa cuixe, savoirs qu'il est desaloiez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, and estende sa jambe si il puet, and li met ton dos sus sa faice, and met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, and retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; and uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, and li signes est qu'il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; and met l'emplastre sus, and fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, and les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; and ne se travaille mie li malaides d'aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not straight, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of gout, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes swollen and sometimes completely drained out and empty.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and one should go before the part where it is dislocated: the return is easy, and one should stretch gently with their hands when it is just felt.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully relocated, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold the assistants apart from the leg, above the ankle; then take the foot to your right hand, and then to your left twice, then stretch upwards, and put the foot up well; and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that the patient does not hurt themselves; then hold the assistants at the thigh, and another assistant stretches the foot to your hands or to a strap that is tied around the leg above the ankle; then stretch each assistant equally, and the pillows be placed closely between the patient's thighs to retain the patient when being stretched; then place the mirrors evenly on the dislocation in your hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is in place, so put the poultice and bandages on top, and make the wrap tight, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch out for the veins that are above the ankle at the back, lest the ligament be too tight; then leave it two or three days, and if the ligament softens, loosen it; then release it on the fourth day, and advise the patient not to move for four days; and if he goes before that term, it is not a surety that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form and come, then it is necessary that you heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	knees
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the knees are drained, then it is necessary to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on .i. table entirely straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it subsides; and when it is even, and there is nothing apparent, put a board underneath the sole of the foot at two inches, then make the wrap tight, and leave it three days, then release it; and let it rest, until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la veut restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides meurt: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n'es saiges en l'art et tu ne l'as usé longement, et se tu n'es piteux et miséricorps et tardis, ne mie hardi; et use au commencement de choses apaisantes apostème chaud, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n'i vois espérance de santé; et quant tu i vois espérance, si ramène maintenant le membre au lieu, ainsois que li apostèmes chaus i vienne; et quant li membres est à lieu, si administer choses apaisantes apostème chaud, et cure la plaie, si comme il convient, d'oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus déservés, si les oste, et fais ce que nous avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d'entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j'ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Créateur, et pour la savetéit de t'arme et de ton cors.
Amen	Amen
